CONVERSATIONAL
TAHITIAN
An Introduction to the Tahitian Language
oj French Polynesia
r; ’■•**'
Tahitian is spoken throughout French
Polynesia as the lingua franca. In spite
of this, until now the only Tahitian
grammars have been written either in
French or with a heavily ecclesiastical
aim. This book caters for the need for
a general introduction to the Tahitian
language written in English.
It is a comprehensive study based on
modern linguistic techniques, but presented
in non-technical language. By
means of a series of lessons, exercises,
and passages for translation, the reader
becomes familiar with the basic and
recurring grammatical structures used
in everyday situations, while at the
same time learning something of the
culture and customs of the inhabitants
of French Polynesia.
Both the language specialist and the
traveller to the Polynesian islands will
find this book an invaluable guide to
the study of the Tahitian language.
Price in Australia $5.95
A New Zealander by birth, D. T. Tryon
is a graduate of the University of
Canterbury and the Australian National
University. At present he is a Research
Fellow in Linguistics at the Research
School of Pacific Studies of the Australian
National University.
He has spent two periods living in
Tahiti while studying the language,
which is a part of his wider interest in
the languages of the South Pacific as a
key to the interpretation of migrations
into the area.
Dr Tryon has previously published
grammars and dictionaries of the
languages of New Caledonia and the
Loyalty Islands, and is currently studying
the languages of the Daly River
Aborigines, Northern Territory, Australia.
Jacket photograph by Brian Lockwood
Jacket designed by Arthur Stokes
Printed in Australia
This book was published by ANU Press between 1965–1991.
This republication is part of the digitisation project being carried
out by Scholarly Information Services/Library and ANU Press.
This project aims to make past scholarly works published
by The Australian National University available to
a global audience under its open-access policy.
CONVERSATIONAL
TAHITIAN
CONVERSATIONAL
TAHITIAN
An Introduction
to the Tahitian Language
o f French Polynesia
D. T. Try on
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY PRESS
CANBERRA 1970
© Darrell Trevor Try on 1970
This book is copyright. Apart from any fair dealing
for the purposes of private study, research, criticism,
or review, as permitted under the Copyright Act, no
part may be reproduced by any process without written
permission. Inquiries should be made to the publisher.
Printed and manufactured in Australia
Registered in Australia for transmission by post as a book
National Library of Australia card no. & SBN 7081 0736 2
Library of Congress Catalog Card no. 74-100606
To Gaye
FOREWORD
The present book—one of the first textbooks of Tahitian ever
published in English—fills a serious gap in the literature on Polynesian
languages, and will enable interested persons to acquire a
sound practical knowledge of this important language of the Pacific.
I can speak with feeling on this, having been in the position of trying,
with little success, to learn Tahitian away from Tahiti while utilising
the existing textbooks. Their shortcomings, especially on the phonetic
level, are so great as to render this task nearly futile.
1 am very pleased to see that this publication has resulted from the
work carried out in the Department of Linguistics in the Research
School of Pacific Studies of the Australian National University, and
I welcome it as the fulfilment of a dream conceived during my first
visit to Tahiti four years ago.
S. A. Wurm
Professor o f Linguistics
Research School o f Pacific Studies
Australian National University
CONTENTS
Foreword, by S. A. Wurm vii
Introduction xiii
Lesson 1 Pronunciation 1
Consonants; vowels; vowel length; vowel
sequences; glottal stop; words beginning with a
vowel; the syllable; stress; elision; some common
and useful phrases
Lesson 2 The Articles 8
General articles; the dual; special articles
Lesson 3 Numerals and Time 15
Cardinal numbers; usage of numerals; ordinal
numbers; days of the week; months of the year;
telling the time; temporal expressions
Lesson 4 The Adjective 20
Normal modifiers; changing modifiers;
comparative and superlative; equality; all, every; äna’e
Lesson 5 The Demonstrative 24
Teie; tena; ter a; tana .. . ra; te reira
Lesson 6 Possession 26
Possessive particles; pronoun possessors; common
noun possessors; proper noun possessors;
possessive statements
Lesson 7 The Pronoun 30
Pronouns subject; pronouns object; other object
markers
Lesson 8 The Verb 32
Word order; active verbs; passive verbs
Lesson 9 The Causative Verb 41
Fa’a- or ha’a-; tä-\ causative and passive;
noun + hia; dual forms of the verb; intensified
verbs
Lesson 10 The Negative 46
’Aita and ’aore; ’e’ita and ’e’ore; ’e ’ere; negative
+ roa; ’aiteä and ’aore ä; ’ore
Lesson 11 Verbal Sentence Types 49
Intransitive; transitive; dual object; attributive;
X CONTENTS
passive; passive indirect object; impersonal verbs;
vai
Lesson 12 Non-Verbal Sentences 52
It is, there is; identificational; equational; to have
Lesson 13 Time and Frequency 57
Time phrases; frequency phrases
Lesson 14 Location and Direction 60
Location phrases (in, on, under, above, etc.);
directionals (to, from, etc.)
Lesson 15 Optional Phrases 66
Benefactive; accompaniment; manner
Lesson 16 Purpose and Cause 70
Purpose (in order to, so that); cause (because)
Lesson 17 Imperatives 73
The three degrees of imperative; Arrival in
Tahiti (translation)
Lesson 18 The Interrogative I 76
Yes?, no?; interrogative subject (who?);
interrogative non-subject (whom?, which?, to
whom?, whose?, by whom?); The Post Office
(translation)
Lesson 19 The Interrogative II 81
Why?; where?; when?; how?; what?;
Conversation (translation)
Lesson 20 Dependent Sentences I 87
Dependent subject; dependent non-subject; Visit
to the Shops (translation)
Lesson 21 Dependent Sentences II 92
Why; when; while, when; how; what; whether;
that; since; where; Copra (translation)
Lesson 22 Special Verbal Forms 97
Reflexive; reciprocal; emphatic pronoun; ability
(can, able to); competence (know how to);
attempted action (try to); The Market (translation)
Lesson 23 Desiderative, Necessitative, Conditional 101
Desiderative (want, want to); necessitative (must,
should, ought); conditional (if); Fishing
(translation)
Lesson 24 Conjunctions 106
Usage; Pearl-shell Diving (translation)
Further Passages for Translation 108
Tahiti 108
Things to do in Tahiti 110
Planting Sweet Potatoes 112
The Eel’s Hole 113
The Fourteenth of July 114
CONTENTS Xi
Orange-picking 117
The Apetahi Flower 119
House-building 120
Fishing with Stones 121
The Breadfruit Legend 123
The Lepers’ Feast Day 125
Key to Exercises 127
Key to Translations 136
The Tahitian Family 146
Tahitian-English Glossary 148
English-Tahitian Glossary 161
Index 174
INTRODUCTION
Tahitian is spoken in the Society Islands of French Polynesia.
The main islands on which it is spoken are Tahiti, Moorea, Raiatea,
Tahaa, Maupiti, Huahine, and Borabora. It is also widely spoken
and understood in most of the islands of the Tuamotu archipelago.
Numerous grammars of Tahitian, written almost exclusively in
French, have appeared in the past. The need has been felt for an
up-to-date Tahitian grammar, written in English, especially in view
of the development of tourism and the large number of Englishspeaking
visitors to these islands. Previous grammars have been
based on classical European models, and have not been entirely
satisfactory in showing how Tahitian functions. Others have been
written with the purpose of evangelisation in mind.
The aim of the present work is to present a course in conversational
Tahitian, the Tahitian heard every day in Tahiti and the surrounding
islands. It is hoped that by means of this book readers will quickly
and clearly grasp the structure of the Tahitian language, so unlike
that of European languages, and be able to communicate easily in it.
This work does not, however, constitute a normative grammar of
Tahitian which states that such and such a construction is correct,
to the exclusion of other constructions often heard. Such a grammar
would need to be written by the Tahitians themselves. What is
represented here is an attempt to eliminate the formal and often
archaic Tahitian found in theological literature, and to concentrate
on the language and expression of Tahiti as used in everyday affairs.
Conversational Tahitian is not written for linguists alone, but for
people generally who are interested in Tahiti and Tahitian. For this
reason, technical terms have been avoided as far as possible.*
This study does not follow the same lines as existing grammars of
Tahitian, but looks at Tahitian within the framework of Oceanic
languages. Some of the traditional descriptive features have, however,
been retained in the interests of clarity. The present work
consists of a series of graded lessons, with exercises. Once the basic
* Specialist linguistic papers on aspects of Tahitian are, however, planned for
the near future.
xiv INTRODUCTION
structures have been established, passages for translation are introduced.
An attempt has been made to make these passages as
relevant as possible to everyday life and events in Tahiti. Keys to
the exercises and translations have been provided, together with a
Tahitian-English, English-Tahitian glossary. In the key to the
translations, a rather literal translation has been given so that the
student may follow it more easily; this has naturally rendered the
English more stilted than would have been the case had a free
translation been given.
The orthography of this work is based on the traditional
orthography currently in use in Tahiti, but differs from it in the
following ways:
(i) long vowels are consistently marked;
(ii) the glottal stop is indicated in all occurrences;
(iii) the “elision” of traditional Tahitian orthography is not indicated
(see §9).
During the preparation of this book, I have become indebted to
many people and institutions. Firstly I would like to express my
gratitude to the Australian National University, for making the
research possible.
I wish to acknowledge my debt of gratitude to Professor S. A.
Wurm, and to Drs D. C. Laycock, B. R. Finney, H. Bluhme, and
N. Gunson for their advice and comment during the preparation of
the manuscript.
In Tahiti, I am much indebted to the Office de la Recherche
Scientifique et Technique Outre-mer, and especially to its Director,
Mr H. Lavondes. I must also thank Mr Maco Tevane of Radio
Tahiti for his assistance and comments, Mr Claude Robineau of
O. R.S.T.O.M., and Mr and Mrs Joseph Adam of Taunoa.
My special thanks are due to my principal informant and guide,
Mr Frangois Taumihau Peu, of Papeete, for his unfailing efforts and
continued encouragement and co-operation.
To the many people unnamed, but certainly not forgotten, my
sincere thanks for the generous assistance, co-operation, and
hospitality given to me during my stays in Tahiti.
My thanks, also, to my parents for the invaluable assistance which
they gave.
It is the hope of the author that this book may be of use to English
speakers interested in Tahiti and Tahitian, and that from reading it
they may gain some insight into the language, daily events, and
pastimes of the peoples of the Society Islands.
Lesson 1
PRONUNCIATION
Before commencing the study of Tahitian grammar, it is necessary
to enumerate the sounds in Tahitian and their pronunciation. Particular
attention should be paid to pronunciation, as a bad pronunciation,
even with a good grammatical command of the language, can
result in confusion and total lack of communication.
1. Consonants
There are eight consonants in Tahitian,* namely:
f h m n p r t v
These approximate to the following sounds in English:
/, phonetically [f], as in friend;
h, phonetically [h], as in house; pronounced as [9] as in German
ich, or [s] as in shoe when preceded by i and followed by o;
m, phonetically [m], as in mouse;
n, phonetically [n], as in nap;
p, phonetically [p], as in sponge; this sound is unaspirated, (i.e. it
lacks the puff' of air that accompanies the p in pill or put);
r, phonetically [r], is a so-called flap sound, similar to a single tap
of the English rolled r; it is sometimes trilled like a Scottish r;
t, phonetically [t], as in stand; this sound is unaspirated, as forp,
above;
v, phonetically [v], as in vine; v is sometimes pronounced w, as a
free variant; it is also realised as [ß], which is like an English v,
except that it is produced with the upper and lower lips,
instead of with the upper teeth and lower lip. However, the
pronunciation of v as in vine is proposed to the reader, as it will
cause no confusion, nor impede communication.
In some words, r and n occur as variants. Thus:
rava ’i
nava 7 to be adequate
* The glottal stop should strictly be classed as a consonant, but for pedagogical
reasons it is treated separately (§§ 5 and 6).
2 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
, to obtain, noa a to be acqnuired
One also finds/ and h as variants, as in:
pufa ____
puha copra
ufi
uhi yam
tufa ’a share tuha ’a
When a word manifesting this phenomenon is used in the text of this
book, the more common variant only is given.
2. Vowels
There are five vowels in Tahitian, as follows:
a e i o u
Their approximate English and French equivalents are:
a, phonetically [a], as in butter, or French patte, paw;
e, phonetically [e], as in French, ete, summer;
i, phonetically [i], as in French ville, city,* and not unlike that in
team, but shorter;
0, phonetically [o], as in French eau, water, or Scottish go, but
shorter;
u, phonetically [u], as in French cou, neck, or English foot; in other
words, this is a u sound made with strong lip rounding.
3. Vowel Length
In Tahitian there is a second series of vowels, which are long vowels
corresponding to those in §2. They are the same in quality as those
above, but are pronounced as if they were a double vowel.|
These vowels are:
a, phonetically [a:], as in father, or French pate, pie;
e, phonetically [e:], as in ete, summer, but longer;
1, phonetically [i:], as in machine, but longer;
o, phonetically [o:], as in go, or French pole, pole;
it, phonetically [u:], as in moo, or French cou, neck, but longer.
The long vowel will always be marked by a stroke over the vowel, as
* Note that rahi (big), ’inanahi (yesterday), and 'ananahi (tomorrow) are often
pronounced rahai, ’inanahai, and 'ananahai respectively.
t In §§ 7 and 8, on the syllable and stress, a long vowel is regarded as a sequence
of two identical vowels.
PRONUNCIATION 3
above, throughout the lessons that follow. Numerous pairs of words
are distinguished solely by the length of the vowel. Short vowels are
pronounced very short when they form a minimal contrast with a
word containing a long vowel, but not otherwise, as in the following
selection of examples:
parau to speak parau pearl-shell
matau hook mätau to know
maro dry maro to be stubborn
nana herd nana for him
mati match mati March
M e twisted f e f e a boil
pepe butterfly pepe to wound
7 by, at 7 full
’api page ’api new
poro corner poro a marble
maro royal belt maro dry
pupu group pupu sea-shell
tutu kind of tree tutu a cook
’ua past tense marker üa rain
4. Vowel Sequences
Sequences of two vowels are common in Tahitian (sometimes more
than two), as follows;
a ae ai ao au
ea e ei eo eu
ia ie i io iu
oa oe oi o ou
ua ue ui uo u
With sequences of vowels, normally each vowel of the sequence is
distinctly pronounced.*
Examples of vowel sequences:
tapu, to cut; haere, to go; vai, to be; ao, world, day; parau, to
speak;
mea, thing; ’c, different; hei, garland; reo, language; pareu,
sarong;
'ia, when; 'ohie, easy; 7, full; hio, to whistle;^/, weary;
hoa, friend; hoe, to paddle; hopoi, to carry; poro, marble; hou,
before;
* However, ai, au, ae, and oi tend to become diphthongised.
B
4 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
pna’a, pig; ueue, to shake; nui, immense; ’uo’ou, clean;pupil, seashell.
Sequences of two consonants are not found in Tahitian.
5. Glottal Stop
This sound, marked ’ throughout the text, is of prime importance in
the pronunciation of the Tahitian language. It consists of blocking
the air-stream with the glottis. It is similar to the sound heard, for
example, in the cockney pronunciation of the word “butter”,
where the “tt” is not sounded, but replaced by a glottal stop, thus
“bu’er” . In American English, a glottal stop also occurs often in
words such as “cotton”, which becomes “co’n”.* Some Tahitian
examples:
pua’a pig I’oa name
’apo’o hole ha’ari coconut
6. Words Beginning with a Vowel
Particular attention should be paid to words beginning with a vowel
in Tahitian, as there are four possible pronunciations of the initial
vowel, as follows:
(i) The vowel may be short and preceded by a glottal stop, as in:
’oe you
’umara sweet potato
’uri dog
’amu eat
(ii) The vowel may be long and preceded by a glottal stop, as in:
’au to swim
’/a to steal
(iii) The vowel may be short, not preceded by a glottal stop, as in:
au I, me
atua God
(iv) The vowel may be long, not preceded by a glottal stop, as in:
ao world, day
ciu nice, good
When the initial vowel is long, but not preceded by a glottal stop, it
is lightly pharyngealised (pronounced with a rough breathing). When
this vowel is followed immediately by a glottal stop, the rough breathing
becomes very strong, as in:
i ’a fish
* The Tahitian glottal stop differs somewhat from the cockney one in that the
blockage of the air-stream is often incomplete, especially between identical
vowels, producing what could be called a “glottal croak” or glottal tremulant.
PRONUNCIATION
to preach
famine
5
a ’o
d ’e
Several sets of words in Tahitian are distinguished solely by the
manner of articulation of the initial vowel. A selection of examples
follows:
’au to chew ’oe you singular
’du to swim d’e famine
du nice, good ’o’e sword
d ’u to hunt be bell
au I, me
’ua past tense marker
’ata to laugh ’u’a to flower
at a cloud ’Ü’a kind of crab
’ata difficult üa rain
’oi sharp, pointed ’a ’o the fat of a fish
oi to mix ä’o to preach
’o ’i to sprain do world, day
oi to almost do ’ori to dance
something ori haere to go for a walk
7. The Syllable
The syllable in Tahitian consists of + C + N, where C equals a
consonant or glottal stop, and N equals either a short vowel, a long
vowel (i.e. two identical vowels), or a sequence of two different vowels.
+ indicates that the consonant is optional, while + indicates that the
vowel or sequence is obligatory in the syllable. Where a sequence of
three vowels occurs, the first two should be taken as one syllable, except
when the second vowel is long.
Examples:
pd-ti-’i girl
ta-mai-ti boy
ta-’a-ta person
’oi-a he, she
’o-td-ne male (fish, tree)
ma-nu bird
8. Stress
In Tahitian, the primary stress is not nearly so heavy as in English in
many words, and at times it appears that no particular syllable bears
6 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
the primary stress. However, there are four stress rules which are in
evidence:
(i) In words containing either a sequence of different vowels or a
long vowel, the stress falls on the first vowel of the sequence, or on the
long vowel.
Examples:
tiare flower
rditi rice
tia ’a shoe
pahi ship
tamditi boy
tamahine daughter
(ii) With words containing two such sequences (i.e. sequences of
different or same vowels, that is, long vowels), then the stress falls
on the first of the sequences in the word.
Examples:
feid t group
tamaroa boy
fardoa bread
(iii) With words not containing long vowels or sequences of
vowels, the stress falls on the penultimate syllable.
Examples:
fare house
rna’o shark
ta ’dta person
’ohipa work
(iv) With compound words, usually polysyllabic, each part of the
compound takes its own stress.
Examples:
pda 'a-niho goat
pua ’a-horo-fenda horse
9. Elision
When a word ends in the same vowel as the initial vowel of the following
word, the identical vowels form a sequence (i.e. a long vowel).
For example, ’ia a'ahidta (when it is dawn) is pronounced as if it were
'ia' ahiata.
In some Tahitian orthographies, this process has been called elision
and marked with an apostrophe, but in this work such elisions will
not be marked as they are quite regular.
PRONUNCIATION 7
When a short vowel and a long vowel come together in different
words, the short vowel is elided; thus noa atu (unless) becomes noatu.
10. Some Common and Useful Phrases
Some useful phrases and common idioms in Tahitian are as follows:
’Ia ora na. Hello. Greetings. Good morning.
’la ora na ’oe! Hi there!
A haere mai! Come here!
Haere mai. Welcome.
Parahi. Good-bye.
Ara'ua’e. See you later.
’E aha te huru? How are you?
’E aha to ’oe huru? How are you?
Maita’i roa. Very good.
Manava, maeva! Welcome (to dignitaries).
Manuia! Cheers! Good luck!
’E hoa! Friend!
’E homai Friends!
’E. Yes.
’Aita. No.
Atira. That’s enough.
’E ara! Be careful!
No te aha? Why?
’Eiaha ’e ru! There’s no hurry; wait!
’Em! Wait a minute!
’Aita ’e pe’ape’a. It doesn’t matter.
’0 vai tera? Who is that?
Mamu! Be quiet! Silence!
Maniania! Stop the noise!
A haere ätu! Go away!
Fa’atea! Scram!
’E aha? What?
’Ehia moni? How much is this?
’E mea mama. It is cheap.
’Aita tä’u ’e moni. I have no money.
Tei hea te ho ter a? Where is the hotel?
Tei hea te fare rata? Where is the Post Office?
’/ teie nei mahäna* Today.
’Inanahi; ’ananahi Yesterday, tomorrow.
Maururu 'ia ’oe. Thank you.
* Throughout this book the second vowel of mahnna has been marked long.
Many speakers, however, pronounce the vowel short in this word.
Lesson 2
THE ARTICLES
Vocabulary:
te manu the bird te p u a 'a the pig
te ’a v a ’ava the cigarette te vahie the wood
te fa r e the house te taro the taro
na metu a the parents te m a i ’a the banana
te ’uri the dog te vi the mango
te p a p e the water te mamo e the sheep
te \ ’a the fish te f e t i ’i the family
te m a ’a the food te ari 7 the king
te ’uru the breadfruit te moa the fowl
te tiare the flower te ’i ’ita the pawpaw
t e f e ’i the red banana te u p o ’o the head
te h a ’ari the coconut te fa rä o a the bread
te f a ’a ’apu the plantation te ra iti the rice
te pa h a the wild boar te m o n i the money
te reo the language te fa ra n e the franc
te p a in the steamer hanere hundred
te p o ti the boat hitu seven
te hoa the friend p a e five
te m a e h a ’a the twin torn three
te tia ’a the shoe m a ita ’i good
te tanmroa the boy ’ite to see
te tam a r i’i the child reva to leave
te t a ’ata the person na rima the hands
te p a ra h ira ’a the chair
The articles in Tahitian will be explained in three sections, general
articles, the dual, and special articles.
THE ARTICLES 9
11. General Articles
TABLE OF ARTICLES
Singular Plural Dual
Definite te te mau tau na
Indefinite te ho’e te mau, te nau
Stative
te tahi
’o
’e
ho’e mau
fte tahi mau)
\vetahi mau j
na
Te. The article te is the definite article, meaning “the”. In conversation
it is also used as an indefinite article, meaning “a, an” .
Examples:
te fare the house
te ta’ata the man
te ’uru the breadfruit
Te mau. The plural of te is te mau. Thus we have:
te mau fare the houses
te mau ta’ata the men
te mau ’uri the dogs
(No plural sign is added to the noun itself.) Note that te alone may be
used to indicate a plural if the idea of plurality is not stressed, for
example:
te ta’ata the people
Te ho’e. The indefinite article, meaning “a, an” , is indicated by
te ho’e, thus:
te ho’e pah'i a ship
te ho’e fare a house
Te ho’e mau. A limited plural is indicated by te ho’e mau. Example:
te ho’e mau tamari’i some children
Compare this with the unrestricted plural: te mau tamari’i children,
the children.
Te tahi. This article is commonly used in a very general sense, and
means “a, another, a different one”. Thus:
te tahi fare another house
te tahi ta’ata another man
10 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
Te tahi mau. The plural of te tahi is te tahi mau, or optionally vetahi
mau. Thus:
te tahi man fare
vetahi mau fare the other houses
’O. The article ’o has three functions:
(i) It is a kind of demonstrative article, meaning “it is”, with
proper nouns and pronouns. Thus:
’o Tahiti it is Tahiti
’o Teri’i it is Terii
’o vau it is I
’o ratou it is they
(ii) It is also used with proper nouns used as subject. Thus:
’ua reva atu ’o Peu Peu left
(iii) ’O is also used as kind of emphatic pronoun marker with ’oe
(= you sing.), but not with other pronouns. Example:
’e ta’ata maita’i ’o ’oe you are a good man
For explanation of this sentence structure, see §73.
’£. This article has two functions:
(i) ’£ corresponds to ’o and is used with all common nouns with
the same demonstrative force. Thus:
’e ta’ata it is a person
But:
’e vahine
’e mau vahine
’o te ta’ata
’o te vahine
it is a woman
they are women
it is the man
it is the woman
(ii) ’E is also a vocative, used when addressing people; the person
addressed may also be followed by e when further emphasis is sought.
Examples:
’E Teri’i iane! Oh! Mr Terii!
’Ehoa! Friend!
’E Teri’i e! Oh! Terii!
12. The Dual
In Tahitian, unlike most European languages, there exists a series of
articles used to indicate duality, such as two birds, two men, the
hands, the feet. The dual is also used to indicate a restricted plural,
up to five or six and certainly no more than ten.
The three dual articles used in conversational Tahitian are:
na, nau, tau na.
THE ARTICLES 11
Na. This article is used in two ways:
(i) It is the article used with two persons or objects which are normally
found in pairs. Thus:
na rima the hands
na metua the parents
na ta’ata the men
(ii) It is also used with numbers up to ten, with reference to persons,
if the actual number is specified. Thus:
’ua ’ite au 7 na ta’ata to’oliitu I saw seven men
However, na may be used without restriction of number when the
subjects may be considered to form a group. Examples:
na moni ’e pae härtere farane. The sum of five hundred francs
’ua ’ite au 7 na ta’ata ’e torn hanere I saw three hundred men
The usage of the numerals themselves is discussed in §16.
Nau. This article is used under the same conditions as for na,
when the subject in question is
opposition with tau na. Thus:
nau tamari’i
nau fare
nau manu
a hi ’o na 7 ter a nau tia ’a
near the speaker, and sets up an
the youths
the houses
the birds
look at these shoes
nau moni ’e pae hanere farane 500 francs
Tau na. One uses this article normally when the subject is not
near the speaker. Thus:
(’e) tau na ta’ata the men
{’e) tau na fe ti’a the stars
tau na tumu ’anani the orange trees
tau na fa ’a ’apu taro the taro fields
tau na maeha’a the twins
13. Special Articles
(a) Indication of Sex. In Tahitian, gender is not indicated with
nouns, as it is in European languages. A number of words exist to
specify sex where required, as follows:
Täne and Vahine. Täne is used with kinship terms* and proper
nouns denoting human beings to indicate the masculine; vahine is
used to indicate the feminine. These correspond to the English Mr
and Mrs. Examples:
Teri’i täne Mr Terii
Teri’i vahine Mrs Terii
* The full list of kinship terms is given in §146.
12 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
te metua tane
te metua vahine
the father
the mother
’Otane and ’ovahine. These indicate masculine and feminine with
reference to trees or plants, fish, and shellfish, but only when there is a
reason to specify the sex. Thus:
777a ’otane male pawpaw
7 ’ita ’ovahine female pawpaw
Öni and ufa. These indicate masculine and feminine respectively,
with reference to animals. Thus:
moa oni a rooster
moa ufa a hen
’uri oni a dog
’uri ufa a bitch
Pa’e and maia’a. These two terms are also applied to animals to
indicate male and female, but are used to indicate that they are adult
animals capable of reproduction or having already reproduced. Thus:
te pua’a pa’e the boar
te pua ’a maia ’a the sow
(b) The Young of Animals. Fanau’a and pinia. Fanau’a is used
to indicate the young of any animal except a sheep, where pinia is
used. Thus:
te pua’a fanau’a the piglet
te ’uri fanau’a the puppy
But: te pinia niamoe the lamb
(c) Quantity. In Tahitian there is a series of words indicating a
group, and as these occur frequently in conversation they will be
explained immediately.
Hui is used respectfully of a group of esteemed people. Thus:
te hui mana the authorities
te hui ari 7 the royal family
te hui ra’atira the population
Ma follows the noun and indicates a family group. Examples:
Teri’i ma the Teriis
Peu ma the Peu family
Nana indicates a flock or herd. Thus:
te hd’e nana i ’a a shoal of fish
te hö ’e nana mamoe a flock of sheep
THE ARTICLES 13
Taura indicates a race or breed of men or animals. Thus:
te hö’e taura ’uri a breed of dogs
te ho ’e taura ta ’ata a race of men
Ruru indicates a bundle or collection of something which is tied
with a rope or liana. Thus:
te ruru vahie the bundle of wood
te ruru ma’a the bundle of food
’Amui indicates a bundle of goods, tied, but containing all the same
articles in the one bundle. Thus:
te ’amui taro the package of taros
te ’amui ’uru the package of breadfruit
’Ata is used almost synonymously with ruru. Example:
te ’ata ’uru the collection of breadfruit
Pe’eta indicates a bunch still attached to a branch. Thus:
te pe’eta ’uru the bunch of breadfruit
te p e ’eta ha’ari the bunch of coconuts
Atari indicates a bunch of fruit picked from the tree. Examples:
te atari f e ’i the bunch of red bananas
te atari mai’a the bunch of bananas
Pupa indicates a bunch, usually of smaller fruits. Thus:
te pupa vine the bunch of grapes
te pupa vi the bunch of mangoes
Pu’e indicates a collection of men, animals, or foods. Thus:
te pu’e ta’ata the troop of men
te pu’e Va the collection (catch) of fish
te pu’e tiare the heap of flowers
Feiä indicates an ensemble, an entire group of people engaged in
some activity. Thus:
te fern fa ’a’apu the farmers
te feiä tai ’a the fishermen
te feiä rätere the tourists
Ma’a indicates a small quantity when applied especially to food.
Thus:
ma’a raiti a little rice
ma’a faräoa a little bread
ma’a pape a little water
14 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
14. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. Te fare. 2. Te mau ta ’ata. 3. Te hd’e ’uri. 4. Te tahi ta’ata. 5. Na
rima. 6. Tau na ta’ata. 7. ’E nau fare. 8. Peu täne. 9. Te ’uri ufa.
10. Te pua’a dni. 11. Te ’uri maia’a. 12. Te moa oni. 13. Te ’i ’ita
’ovahine. 14. Te tahi mau fare. 15. Teri’i vahine. 16. Te taura ’uri.
17. Te hd’e nana i ’a. 18. Te ruru md’a. 19. Te ’ata ’uru. 20. Te
pupa tiare. 21. Peu md. 22. Te p u ’e ta’ata. 23. Te pupa vi. 24. Te
p e ’etd ha’ari. 25. Te ’amui ’uru.
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. The man. 2. The men. 3. A dog. 4. The parents. 5. The hands.
6. A few men. 7. Two chairs. 8. MrTerii. 9. The bitch. 10. The sow.
11. The puppy. 12. The lamb. 13. The dogs (male). 14. The hen.
15. The two hens. 16. A flock of sheep. 17. A group of girls. 18. A
pack of dogs. 19. A bunch of bananas. 20. A bundle of wood.
21. A bunch of flowers. 22. The authorities. 23. The fishermen.
24. The Peu family. 25. A bunch of mangoes.
Lesson 3
NUMERALS AND TIME
Vocabulary:
pohe to die ho 7 to return
ma ’i to be sick tai ’a to fish
’ehia ? how many? te hepetoma the week
to ’ohia ? how many? te ’ava’e the month, moon
’i roto in, inside te matahiti the year
te piha the room te hora the time, hour
roa’a to catch, obtain te miniti the minute
te po the night te va’a the canoe
haere to go te pbti 7 the girl
15. Cardinal Numbers
The cardinal numbers in Tahitian are as follows
1 hb’e, tahi 15 ho ’e ’ahuru ma pae
2 piti 16 hb’e ’ahuru ma ono
3 torn 17 hb’e ’ahuru ma hitu
4 maha 18 hb’e ’ahuru ma va’u
5 pae 19 ho’e ’ahuru ma iva
6 bno 20 piti ’ahuru
7 hi tu 21 piti ’ahuru ma ho’e
8 va’u 30 torn ’ahuru
9 iva
10 hb’e ’ahuru
11 ho ’e ’ahuru ma hö ’e
12 ho ’e ’ahuru ma piti
13 hö ’e ’ahuru ma torn
14 hb’e ’ahuru ma maha
40 maha ’ahuru
50 pae ’ahuru
60 bno ’ahuru
100 ho’e hanere
101 hb’e hanere ma ho’e
1000 hb’e tauatini
Tauatini may also indicate multitudes. Example:
’ua tauatini e ’ua tauatini te ta’ata
there were thousands and thousands of people
16. Usage of Numerals
The usage of the numerals will be discussed in enumerations; as
subject; and as object.
16 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
(a) Enumerations. In enumerations of persons and objects alike,
the particle ’e precedes the numeral in all instances, except for numerals
between ten and nineteen, as follows:
’epiti ta’ata
’e hitu va’a
’e toru ’ahuru va’a
’e tom ’ahum ta’ata
hd’e ho'e ’ahuru ma hitu ta’ata
there are two persons
there are seven canoes
there are thirty canoes
there are thirty persons
But: ho’e ’ahuru ma hitu va’a
there are seventeen canoes
there are seventeen persons
With numbers less than ten, the restricted plural or dual articles,
tau na, na, and nau, are frequently used, as in:
’e piti tau na ta’ata there are two persons
’e hitu na va’a there are seven canoes
’e hitu tau na va’a there are seven canoes
Or: ’e na va’a ’e hitu there are seven canoes
’e na ta’ata ’e maha there are four persons
These enumerations are most frequently used in response to the
question, “how many?”, rendered in Tahitian by to’ohia? or ’ehia?
To’ohia? is used formally to ask how many, of persons. If this
interrogative is used, then to’o- must precede the numeral in the reply,
if the number is less than ten, as in:
To’ohia ta’ata 7 roto 7 ter a piha?
How many persons are in that room?
To’omaha.
Four.
If the number is greater than ten, then the rules explained above
apply.
’Ehia? is used formally to ask how many, of things.
In conversational Tahitian, however, ’ehia? is used of persons and
things alike. Thus:
’Ehia ta’ata 7 roto 7 teie piha?
How many persons are in this room?
’E pae [hd’e ’ahuru ma ho’e, ’e toru ’ahuru].
Five [eleven, thirty].
’Ehia i ’a ta ’oe 7 roa’a ’inanahi?
How many fish did you catch yesterday?
’E pae [hd’e ’ahuru ma hd’e, ’e toru ’ahuru].
Five [eleven, thirty].
(b) As Subject. When the subject of the sentence is qualified by a
numeral, the numeral may either precede or follow the noun to which
it refers. Examples:
NUMERALS AND TIME 17
’Ua ho’i mai ’e toru tau na ta’ata.
Three people came back.
’Ua ho’i mai ’e pae hanere ta’ata.
Five hundred men came back.
’Ua ho’i mai ia’u ’e toru na ’uri.
My three dogs came back.
Or: ’ Ua ho 7 mai na ta ’ata ’e toru.
Three people came back.
’Ua ho’i mai ta'u na ’uri ’e toru.
My three dogs came back.
(c) As Object. When the object of the verb is qualified by a numeral,
the numeral is preceded by the particle ’e, as above, with the
exception of numbers from ten to nineteen. Examples:
’Ua ’ite au 7 na ta’ata ’e toru.
I saw three persons.
’Ua ’ite au 7 na ta’ata ho’e ’ahuru ma hitu.
I saw seventeen persons.
’Ua ’ite au 7 na ta’ata ’e pae hanere.
I saw five hundred men.
17. Ordinal Numbers
a tahi first a maha fourth
a piti second a pae fifth
a toru third
A may be replaced by te with all numerals except tahi without any
change in meaning. Thus:
te piti second te toru third
matamua the first te maha o ’ the fourth
te piti ’o the second te pae o ’ the fifth
te toru 'o the third
The second, third, etc., thing is conveyed in Tahitian by te plus
numeral, followed by o plus the noun in question, with the exception
of “the first”, which is rendered by matamua following the noun.
Examples:
Te toru 'o te po ’ua ho’i mai vau.
The third night I returned.
Te piti ’o te pö ’ua haere vau ’e tai ’a.
The second night I went fishing.
Te po matamua ’ua haere vau ’e tai ’a.
The first night I went fishing.
The number of times an action is performed is indicated by the
cardinal number preceded by ta’i-. Thus:
ta ’ipiti twice
18 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
ta’itoru three times
ta’imaha four times
Tata’i- preceding the numeral indicates that the number is squared.
Thus:
tat a ’itoru 3 x 3
täta ’imaha 4 x 4
tat a'ip ae 5 x 5
18. Days of the Week
Monire Monday Mahana M ä ’a Saturday
Mahana Piti Tuesday Tapati Sunday
Mahana Torn Wednesday te hepetoma the week
Mahana Maha Thursday 7 te hepetoma 7 mua next week
Far air e Friday 7 te hepetoma 7 ma’iri
Mahana Pae a ’e nei last week
7 teie hepetoma this week
19. Months of the Year
Tenuare January Tiurai July
Fepuare February Atete August
Mäti March Tetepa September
Eperera April Atopa October
Me May Novema November
Tiunu June Ti tenia December
te ’ava’e the month
7 te ’ava’e 7 mua next month
7 te ’ava’e 7 ma’iri a ’e nei last month
te piti no Atete August 2
te maha no Me May 4
te pae nö Mäti March 5
te matahiti the year
7 te matahiti 7 mua next year
7 te matahiti 7 ma’iri a ’e nei last year
te piti no Mäti 7 te matahiti
1968 March 2 1968
20. Telling the Time
’E aha te hora?
Hora ha?
’Ua hora piti
’E hora piti
’E hora ’ahuru ma ho’e.
What is the time?
It has become two o’clock.
It is two o’clock.
It is eleven o’clock.
NUMERALS AND TIME 19
’Ua and ’e may be used one for the other in conversational Tahitian.
’Ua hora hitu e te äfa. It is half-past seven.
’E hora piti e te äfa. It is half-past two.
Minutes to the Hour. There are two methods of indicating
minutes to the hour.
(i) ’E hitu miniti toe ’e hora piti ai. It is 1.53.
’E piti miniti toe ’e hora pae ai. It is 4.58.
(ii) ’E hitu miniti toe ’e tae ätu ai 7 te hora piti. It is 1.53.
’E piti miniti toe ’e tae ätu ai 7 te hora pae. It is 4.58.
The first method is more frequent in conversation, the second being
more formal.
Minutes past the Hour. In the same way, there are two methods of
indicating minutes past the hour.
(i) E hora piti ma’iri ho’e ’ahuru miniti. It is 2.10.
’E hora pae ma’iri ’e piti miniti. It is 5.02.
(ii) ’E ho’e ’ahuru miniti 7 ma’iri no te hora piti. It is 2.10.
’E piti miniti 7 ma’iri no te hora pae. It is 5.02.
21. Temporal Expressions
7 teie nei mahäna
'a nana hi
’inanahi
’inanahi ätu
’ananahi ätu
7 teie po ’ipo 7
7 napo
’ananahi ’ia po
a napo
te po
22. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. ’E torn tau na ta’ata. 2. Na ’uri ’e torn. 3. ’E toru na i ’a. 4. ’E
piti ’ahuru ta’ata. 5. ’E na ta’ata to’opiti. 6. Te pae ’o te po. 7. ’Ehia
I ’a ter a ? 8. ’E ono. 9. ’Te ono ’o te mau poti 7. 10. ’Ua hora ’ahuru ma
piti. 11. ’E hora toru ma’iri ho’e ’ahuru miniti. 12. 'E hora hitu e te
äfa. 13. Te ono no Mäti. 14. ’Epiti miniti toe ’e hora pae ai. 15. 7 te
hepetoma 7 mua.
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. Three men. 2. Four dogs. 3. How many men are there? 4. There
are two men. 5. The sixth night. 6. It is half-past two. 7. It is six
minutes to three. 8. It is nine minutes past four. 9. Twenty-six men.
10. The fourth of December. 11. The eleventh of May. 12. Next
year. 13. The first of April. 14. Ten minutes to six. 15. Sixty coconuts.
today
tomorrow
yesterday
the day before yesterday
the day after tomorrow
this morning
last night
tomorrow night
tomorrow night
night, evening
Lesson 4
THE ADJECTIVE
Vocabulary:
nehenehe beautiful ta ’ato ’a all
purotu handsome pauroa all
roa long äna’e alone, together
poto short te poti 7 the girl
’ino bad te mea the thing
maita ’i good te puai the strength
rahi big te ari 7 the king
’ite wise te ari 7 vahine the queen
iti small te maramarama the intelligence
au lovely te vitiviti the skill
haviti beautiful te va’a the outrigger canoe
marü calm, gentle, soft te tino the body
no ’ano ’a perfumed te reo the voice, language
’ato ’a all te rouru the hair (head)
pa’ato’a all
23. Normal Modifiers
The adjective always follows the noun that it qualifies. Examples:
te ho’e fare nehenehe a beautiful house
te poti’ipurotu the beautiful girl
te mau poti’i purotu the beautiful girls
When a numeral and an adjective occur describing the same noun,
the adjective normally precedes the numeral. Thus:
te mau poti’i purotu ’e iva the nine beautiful girls
In an enumeration, the numeral precedes the noun. Thus:
’e iva mau poti’i purotu there are nine beautiful girls
When two adjectives modify the same noun, the second adjective
normally becomes a noun, and is joined to the first by e. Examples:
to ’oe rouru roa e te haviti your beautiful long hair
te tiare no’ano’a e te haviti the beautiful fragrant flower
THE ADJECTIVE 21
However, if the first adjective is either rahi, “big”, or iti, “small”,
then the second adjective follows the first without any conjunction.
Thus:
to ’oe reo iti maru your sweet little voice
24. Changing Modifiers
A few adjectives in Tahitian take reduplicative forms in the dual and
plural, as follows:
Singular Dual Plural
roa (long) roroa roaroa
poto (short) popoto potopoto
7no (bad) 7 ’ino 7 ’ino
maita’i (good) maita’i maitata 7
rahi (big) rahi rarahi
(Note that maita’i and rahi do not take a reduplicative form in the
the dual.) Examples:
te ta’ata ’ino the bad man
te mau ta ’ata 7 ’ino the bad men
Roaroa and potopoto are also used as emphatic forms, meaning “very
long” and “very short”.
25. The Comparative and Superlative
Rahi translates the English “very”. Thus:
te hd’e ta’ata ’ite rahi a very wise man
Roa also translates “very”, and is more widely used than rahi. Thus:
te ’uri maita’i roa the very good dog
A ’e is used to convey the comparative degree. Thus:
te ta’ata poto the short man
te ta’ata poto a ’e the shorter man
te ta’ata poto roa a’e the shortest man
When a comparison with another person or object is made, the
following three constructions are used:
(i) ’e mea
rahi
iti a’e . . . 7
Examples:
'E mea rahi a’e te pahi 7 te poti.
The steamer is bigger than the boat.
’E mea rahi a ’e vau ’ia ’oe.
I am bigger than you.
’E mea iti a ’e ta’u moni 7 ta ’oe.
My money is less than yours.
22 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
Note that iti translates “less”, and does not apply to physical size in
comparisons. When “smaller in stature” is meant, then hu’a replaces
iti, as in:
'E me a hu’a a’e ’o Moana ’ia ’oe.
Moana is smaller than you.
(ii) V
rahi'
iti . . . 7
Example:
‘E rahi io’u ’ite 7 to ’oe.
My knowledge is greater than yours.
(iii) ’e
’ua hau . . . 7
Example:
’E hau to ’oe puai 7 to ’u.
You are stronger than me.
26. Equality
When sameness is expressed, there are three possible constructions:
(i) ’ua faito noa . . . 7 (it is equal)
Example:
’Ua faito noa te rahi ’o te hapaina hinano 7 te hapaina manuia.
The Hinano glass is the same size as the Manuia glass.
(ii) hd’e a . . . e (it is one, same)
Example:
Ho ’e a to te ari 7 maramarama e to te ari 7 vahine.
The king is as intelligent as the queen.
(Lit. is one the king’s intelligence and the queen’s)
(iii) ’e au . . . 7
Example:
’E äu to te tamaiti vitiviti 7 tö te metua töne.
The son is as skilful as the father.
(Lit. is equal the son’s skill to that of the father)
A parallel construction, ’e a u . . . mai, is used to translate “like, as” .
Example:
’E au ’oe mai te mimi.
You are like a cat.
THE ADJECTIVE 3
27. All, Every
In Tahitian there are four words corresponding to “all”, which are
used in the following three ways:
(i) ’Ato’a is placed directly after noun. Examples:
te mau ta ’ata ’ato ’a all the men
te mau mea ’ato’a all the things
However, if ’ato’a precedes the noun, it takes on the same meaning as
when it follows the verb, namely “also” . Example:
’e tana ’ato’a afata tauiha’a and also his parcel
(ii) Pa’ato’a and ta’ato’a signify “all together”, and may follow
either the verb or the noun. Examples:
te mau ta’ata pa’ato’a all the men
te haere pa ’ato ’a ätura ratou they all went
te mau ’uri ta’ato’a all the dogs
Pa’ato’a is normally used with animate subjects, while ta’ato’a is used
with either animate or inanimate subjects.
(iii) Pauroa is almost synonymous with pa’ato’a and ta’ato’a, but
with stronger emphasis on “together” . Example:
7 te reira taime ’e horo pauroa te i ’a 7 roto 7 te ’aua.
Then all the fish rush into the enclosure.
28. Ana'e
When äna’e follows the noun or pronoun, it is a modifier signifying
“alone, only” . Examples:
’oia äna’e he alone
iatou ana’e we (pi.) alone
When ana’e follows the verb, it has an adverbial function, signifying
“together” . Example:
’E haere äna’e tätou! Let us all go together!
29. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. Na rima nehenehe. 2. Te mau ’uri nehenehe. 3. Te mau va’a roaroa.
4. Te ’uri maita’i roa. 5. ’E piti ’uri maita’i. 6. ’E hitu mau fare
haviti. 7. Te ta’ata poto a ’e. 8. Te mau ta’ata ’i ’ino. 9. ’E mea rahi
a’e te pua’a 7 te ’uri. 10. ’E mea hu’a a ’e te fare ’d Peu 7 to ’oe.
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. The beautiful house. 2. The beautiful houses. 3. The good dog.
4. There are a few long outrigger canoes. 5. The best dog. 6. The
very good dog. 7. There are eight bad men. 8. The dog is as big as
the pig. 9. The dog is smaller than the pig. 10. The pig is bigger than
the dog.
Lesson 5
THE DEMONSTRATIVE
In Tahitian there are four principal demonstrative words, teie, tena,
tera and taua . . . ra. These normally precede the word they modify,
with the exception of the special demonstrative sentence, which will
be explained later.
30. Teie, this (near the speaker, in space and time). Examples:
teie fare
teie ta’ata
teie fare nehenehe
In the plural:
teie mau fare
teie mau ta’ata
teie na rima
teie mau ta ’ata maitata 7 ’e
ono
this house
this man
this beautiful house
these houses
these men
these hands
these six good men
31. Tena, that (near the person addressed, in space and time).
Examples:
tena ta’ata that man
tena mau ta’ata ’Vino those bad men
tena poti’i nehenehe that beautiful girl
It should be noted that teie may become eie, and tena become ena,
but only in the plural. These forms, however, are not very current in
conversational Tahitian.
32. Tera, that (not near the speakers, in space and time). Examples:
tera ta’ata ’ino that bad man
tera mau ’uri those dogs
tera tau na ta’ata those men (few)
tera vahine that woman
33. Taua... r a, used with approximately the same meaning as tera.
Examples:
taua poti’i ra that girl
taua mau poti’i ra those girls
THE DEMONSTRATIVE 25
34. Te reira, renders “that which has been already mentioned in the
conversation or previously referred to” . Examples:
7 te reira taime at that time
7 te reira fa ’a in that valley
35. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. Teie ’uri maita’i roa. 2. Tera ta’ata poto. 3. Tena fare nehenehe.
4. Tera mau poti’i haviti. 5. Teie p o ti’i haviti. 6. Tera ta’ata 'ino.
7. Tera tau na ta’ata ’Vino. 8. Tana mau ’uri ra. 9. Taua ’uri ra.
10. Teie ta’ata poto a ’e.
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. This beautiful house. 2. These beautiful dogs. 3. These lovely
hands. 4. That big dog. 5. Those long outriggers. 6. These few big
men. 7. This small boy. 8. Those four good dogs. 9. That small cat.
10. Those beautiful girls.
Lesson 6
POSSESSION
Vocabulary:
te hoa the friend te ’ahu the dress, clothes
te ’upe’a the net te poti’i the girl
te hope the mistake te tia’a the shoes
te feti ’a the star te tipi the knife
te ra’i the sky te vi the mango
te ’apo’o the hole te ’avae the leg
te \lore the rat te afata the box
te ’ohipa the work te ro’i the bed
te tämuta fare the carpenter te put a the book
te tumu rä’au the tree te rata the letter
te ’ama’a the branch te uäti the watch
te fa ’a ’apu the plantation te ’amura’amä’a the table
toro to extend
36. Possessive Particles
When an item is possessed in Tahitian, it must belong to one of two
classes, the first taking to, ’o, no, and the second taking tä, ’a, na.
Tahitian, then, has two noun classes for purposes of possession.
To, ’o, no. This series of possessive particles is used:
(i) when there is an absolute and intimate relationship between
possessor and possessed;
(ii) with all parts of the body;
(iii) with anything that forms part of a whole;
(iv) with anything that emanates from an animate or inanimate
object;
(v) with anything which shelters or protects or is of great use to
someone.
Tä, ’ä, nä. This series is used to mark acquired possession without
any idea of intimate or absolute relationship.
37. Pronoun Possessors
to'u, tä’u my
tä ’oe, tä ’oe your
POSSESSION 27
tona, tana his, her
our (dual exclusive)
our (dl inclusive)
your (dl)
their (dl)
our (pi. exc.)
our (pi. inc.)
your (pi.)
their (pi.)
to maua, tä maua
to taua, ta tciua
to ’ärua, tä ’ärua
to räua, ta räua
to matou, ta mcitou
to tätou, tä tätou
tö ’outou, tä ’outou
tä rätou, tä rätou
Note: “exclusive” excludes the person addressed; “inclusive”
includes the person addressed.
To ’oe and tä ’oe, “your”, become to when the idea of possession is
not stressed. Examples:
A toro mai na ’i to rima. Give me your hand.
Ta’u and tana* may be used instead of tä’u and tona when possession
is not stressed. Example:
’Ua toro mai ra 7 tana rima.
He held out his hand.
38. Common Noun Possessors
With common noun possessors, ’ä, ’ä, no, nä, to, and tä are the
possessive particles.
* Note that the vowels are pronounced short.
Plural: to’u mau,
to ’oe mau,
Examples: to ’u upo ’o
to ’oe fare
to’u rima
to’u va’a
to rätou metua
to ’outou hoa
to ’outou mau hoa
to ’oe mau fare
tä’u ’uri
tä ’oe ’upe’a
to ’oe hape
But: tä’u vahine
tä’u parau
tä’u mau
tä ’oe mau, etc.
my head
your house
my hand
my outrigger
their parents
your friend
your friends
your houses
my dog
your net
your mistake
my wife
my word
Teie to tamahine. Here is your daughter.
28 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
There are two possible constructions:
(i) noun +
o, nol
a, na_ ] + possessor
Examples:
te feti ’a ’b te ra 7 the stars of the sky
te ’apo'o o te tore the rat’s hole
te ’uri ’a te tavana the chief’s dog
te ’ohipa ’a te tamuta fare the carpenter’s work
Note: rib, na may replace ’o, ’a. Example:
te fe ti’a no te ra’i the stars of the sky
Nb, na seem to indicate a deeper sense of possession than ’b, ’a, but
many Tahitians employ one for the other without any such distinction.
(ii) + te possessor + noun
Examples:
to te tumu ra’au ’ama’a
to te ra’i feti’a
tb te tavana ’uri
tb te tamuta fare ’ohipa
the branch of the tree
the stars of the sky
the chief’s dog
the carpenter’s work
This construction is more elegant and formal than the first one,
although both are used in current conversation.
39. Proper Noun Possessors
With proper noun possessors there are two possible constructions,
the first being more current than the second.
0 ) noun + ~ ’o
’b + possessor
Examples:
tefa’a’apu ’a Peu Peu’s plantation
te upo’o ’o Peu Peu’s head
(ii)
'to
tb + possessor + noun
Examples:
tb Peu upo’o Peu’s head
tb Peu fa ’a’apu Peu’s plantation
49. Possessive Statements
This construction, which will be commented on at length later,
represents a complete utterance, whereas the constructions in §§37,
POSSESSION 29
38, and 39 do not. The construction meaning A belongs to B, for
example, consists of:
"no" "pronoun
+ common noun
nä proper noun
Examples:
Na ’u teie ’uri.
Nö ’u teie fare.
No ’oe tera fare.
No te poti’i tera ’ahu.
Nona tera fare.
No Peu tera tia’a.
Nä Peu tera vahine.
This is my dog.
This is my house.
That is your house.
That is the girl’s dress.
That is his house.
Those are Peu’s shoes.
That is Peu’s wife.
41. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. Tana tipi. 2. Tä maua 'uri. 3. To ’outou va’a. 4. Tbna na rima.
5. Tä ’oe mau ’uri haviti ’e pae. 6. Te mau ’uri ’a te tavana. 7. Te
’ama’a ’o te ho’e tumu vi. 8. Tä te mau tänmta fare ’ohipa. 9. Te ’avae
’o Teri’i. 10. Te mau ’uri ’ä Peu. 11. Nä rätou teie mau afata. 12. No
’orua tera mau ro’i. 13. Nä’u tera puta. 14. Na te tavana tera ’uri.
15. Nä teie vahine tera rata.
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. My dogs. 2. His head. 3. Their (pi.) boats. 4. My six knives.
5. Their (pi.) beautiful clothes. 6. The head of the fish. 7. The branch
of the mango tree. 8. The man’s work. 9. Terii’s head. 10. Peu’s
leg. 11. That is my letter. 12. Those are his boxes. 13. This is
Terii’s book. 14. This is my watch. 15. This is your (pi.) table.
Lesson 7
THE PRONOUN
42. Pronouns Subject
tatou
matou
’outou
rätou*
au, vau
’oe
’oia, ’ona
taua
maua
’orua
raua
Iy
ou
he, she, it
we (dl inc.)
we (dl exc.)
you (dl)
they (dl)
we (pi. inc.)
we (pi. exc.)
you (pi.)
they
There are two forms of the first person singular pronoun, au and
vau. Au is used after words ending in -e or while vau is used elsewhere.
Examples:
In conversational Tahitian, however, vau may replace au at any time.
There are also two forms of the third person singular pronoun,
’oia and ’ona. ’Oia is the usual pronoun, and ’ona is mostly used only
if the subject has already been mentioned in the conversation, and is
known to both speakers. ’Ona has a demonstrative force which ’oia
lacks.
43. Pronouns Object
Since we will be learning in the next lesson how verbs work and how
to make sentences, the direct object forms of the pronouns are given
here:
’ia ’u me
’ia ’oe you
’iana him, her
’ia taua us (dl inc.)
* Vera also, meaning “those about whom one has spoken”. Not much used in
conversation.
’e ta’iri au
’e horo vau
I shall hit
I shall run
THE PRONOUN 31
’ia maua
’ia ’drua
’ia raua
’ia tätou
’ia matou
’ia ’outou
’ia ratou
us (dl exc.)
you (dl)
them (dl)
us (pi. inc.)
us (pi. exc.)
you (pi.)
them (pi.)
Examples:
’ua ta’iri au ’ia ’oe
’ua ’ite au 'ia ratou
’ua here ’oia ’ia’u
I hit you (Lit. hit I you)
I saw them
she loves me
44. Other Object Markers
It is convenient to give the direct object forms for common nouns
and proper nouns immediately, as they will be used in Lesson 8, and
are absolutely essential.
(a) Proper Nouns. When a proper noun is the direct object of a
verb, it must be preceded by ’ia in the same way as a pronoun. Examples:
’ua hohoni te ’uri ’ia Peu
the dog bit Peu (Lit. bit the dog Peu)
’ua ’ite au ’ia Teri ’i
I saw Terii
(b) Common Nouns. When a common noun is the direct object
of a verb, it must be preceded by 7 followed by the normal subject
articles as seen above. Examples:
’Ua tapu te ta’ata 7 te tumu ’uru.
The man cut down the breadfruit tree.
(Lit. cut the man the breadfruit tree)
’Ua täpü te ta’ata 7 te mau tumu ha’ari.
The man cut down the coconut trees.
Lesson 8
THE VERB
Vocabulary:
haere to go ani to ask
tama ’a to eat pah o n o to answer
’au to swim ta ’i to cry
t a ’oto to sleep tauturu to help
maniania to make a noise h a ’a p i ’i to learn
o ti to finish h o ’o m a i to buy
tapu to cut hina ’aro to like, want
horo ’a to give ta p e ’a to stop
tupa 7 to kill inu to drink
ma ’iti to elect horo to run
üa to rain tunu to cook
hohoni to bite f a ’aro ’o to hear
’ia to steal rave to do, make,
p a ’imi, ’imi to look for take
f a t i to break ’amu to eat
p a ra ri to break, smash p a ra u to speak
tanu to plant p o h e to die
p u re to pray te hapaina the glass
’ite to see, know te ’o fa ’i the stone
hi ’o to look at te ta o ’a the gift
f a ’ari 7 to receive te ha ’ari the coconut
tae to arrive te üfi the yam
te m a tete the market te ’umara the sweet potato
te vahie the wood te p ia the beer
te tavana the chief te p ere ’o ’o uira the car
te tempo ’o the hat te tite ti the ticket
te i ’oa the name te manureva the plane
te m iti the sea te pitha the copra
te m a ta ’i the wind te m o n i the money
te ’iore the rat te ’oire the city
45. Word Order
Before discussing the verb in Tahitian and its tenses, it should be
THE VERB 33
pointed out that the word order in the sentence is different from many
European languages.
Normal word order = verb + subject + object
46. Active Verbs
(a) Tenses. Tahitian tenses do not correspond to those of European
languages, a fact to which students of Tahitian should pay
particular attention.
The tenses are as follows:
(i) te + verb -f nei + subject
This form indicates an immediate future or a present continuous
tense. It translates “in the act of”, with overtones of proximity to the
speaker. The table of verb forms is as follows:
te tama ’a nei au
te tama’a nei ’oe
te tama’a nei ’oia
te tama’a nei iaua
te tama’a nei maua
te tämä’a nei ’onia
te tama’a nei raua
te tama’a nei tatou
te tama’a nei matou
te tama’a nei ’outou
te tama’a nei rätou
te tämä’a nei te vahine
te tämä’a nei 'o Teri’i
I am eating
you are eating
he/she is eating
we (dl inc.) are eating
we (dl exc.) are eating
you two are eating
they two are eating
we (pi. inc.) are eating
we (pi. exc.) are eating
you (pi.) are eating
they are eating
the woman is eating
Terii is eating
When the action is not thought of as taking place in close proximity
to the speaker, then nei is replaced by maira. Example:
Te ’amu maira räua 7 te ’uru.
They two are eating breadfruit.
(ii) te + verb + ra + subject
This verbal construction indicates “was in the act of” and “has been
in the act of doing something for some time”, with overtones of
distance from the speaker. It approximates to the European imperfect
tense, which, however, lacks the second Tahitian meaning. The
table of verb forms is:
te ’äu ra vau I was swimming
te ’äu ra ’oe you were swimming
te ’äu ra ’oia he/she was swimming
te ’äu ra täua we (dl inc.) were swimming
te ’äu ra mäua we (dl exc.) were swimming
34 CON VERS AT. ON AL TAHITIAN
te ’äu ra ’orua
te ’äu ra raua
te ’äu ra tätou
te ’an ra matou
te ’au ra ’outou
te ’au ra ratou
te ta’oto ra te ’uri
te ta’oto ra ’o Teri’i
(This may also mean “Terii is
time” .)
you two were swimming
they two were swimming
we (pi. inc ) were swimming
we (pi. exc.) were swimming
you (pi.) were swimming
they were swimming
the dog was sleeping
Terii was sleeping
still asleep and has been for some
(iii) ’ua + verb + subject
This construction indicates both a past action and a present state,
that is to say, the action has been completed while the result of the
action is at present being felt. In Tahitian conversation this is the
construction most commonly used to indicate any past tense. The
table of verb forms is as follows:
’ua iapii vau 7 te vahie
’ua tapu ’oe 7 te vahie
’ua tapu ’oia 7 te vahie
’ua tapu tana 7 te vahie
’ua tapu mima 7 te vahie
’ua tapu ’orua 7 te vahie
’ua tapii raua 7 te vahie
’ua tapu tätou 7 te vahie
’ua tapu matou 7 te vahie
’ua tapu ’outou 7 te vahie
’ua täpü rätou 7 te vahie
I cut the wood
you cut the wood
he/she cut the wood
we (dl inc.) cut the wood
we (dl exc.) cut the wood
you two cut the wood
they two cut the wood
we (pi. inc.) cut the wood
we (pi. exc.) cut the wood
you (pi.) cut the wood
they cut the wood
’ua tapu te vahine 7 te vahie the woman cut the wood
’ua tapu ’o Teri’i 7 te vahie Terii cut the wood
(iv) 7 + verb + na + subject
This construction indicates the idea of a recently completed action.
It is not used as frequently in conversation as the form with ’ua*
The table of forms is as follows:
7 haere na vau 7 te mätete
7 haere na ’oe 7 te mätete
7 haere na ’oia 7 te mätete
7 haere na taua 7 te mätete
7 haere na mäua 7 te mätete
7 haere na ’orua 7 te mätete
I went to the market
you went to the market
he/she went to the market
we (dl inc.) went to the market
we (dl exc.) went to the market
you two went to the market
The 7 . . . na form is, however, used when consequence is expressed; cf. §88.
THE VERB 35
7 haere na raua 7 te mätete
7 haere na tatou 7 te mätete
7 haere na mätou 7 te mätete
7 haere na ’outou 7 te mätete
7 /were na rätou 7 te mätete
they two went to the market
we (pi. inc.) went to the market
we (pi. exc.) went to the market
you (pi.) went to the market
they went to the market
(v) 7 + verb + iho
nei'
ra + subject
This construction indicates a very recent past tense, “to have just
done something” . The form with ra indicates rather “I had ju st___”
The following is the table of forms:
7 täpä iho nei vau 7 te vahie I have just cut the wood
7 täpä iho nei ’oe 7 te vahie you have just cut the wood
7 täpä iho nei ’oia 7 te vahie he/she has just cut the wood
7 täpä iho nei täua 7 te vahie we (dl inc.) have just cut the wood
7 täpä iho nei mäua 7 te vahie we (dl exc.) have just cut the wood
7 täpä iho nei ’orua 7 te vahie you two have just cut the wood
7 täpä iho nei räua 7 te vahie they two have just cut the wood
7 täpä iho nei tätou 7 te vahie we (pi. inc.) have just cut the wood
7 täpä iho nei mätou 7 te vahie we (pi. exc.) have just cut the wood
7 täpä iho nei ’outou 7 te vahie you (pi.) have just cut the wood
7 täpä iho nei rätou 7 te vahie they have just cut the wood
7 täpä iho nei te ta’ata 7 te vahie the man has just cut the wood
7 täpä iho nei ’o Teri’i 7 te vahie Terii has just cut the wood
(vi) ’e mea maoro + nominalised verb. This is a non-verbal
sentence type, conveying the distant past tense in Tahitian. Examples:
’E mea maoro 7 teie nei to ’u haerera ’a 7 Mo ’orea.
I went to Moorea long ago.
(Lit. it is long now my going to Moorea)
’E mea maoro te horo ’ara ’a hia te tao ’a 7 te tavana.
The gift was given to the chief long ago.
Further reference to this structure is made in §73.
(vii) ’ua oti + possessive adjective + noun + 7 te + verb.
This is a special construction used to indicate completed action.
Examples:
’Ua oti tä’u vahie 7 te täpä.
I have finished cutting the wood.
(Lit. is finished my wood the cutting)
Pau replaces oti to indicate “finished”, when the verb is concerned
with eating. Thus:
’Ua pau tä te vahine ’ina’i pua’atoro 7 te ’amu.
The woman has finished eating the beef.
36 CONYERS AT. ON AL TAHITIAN
(viii) ’ua matau + subject + 7 te + verb
Habitual action, indicated by mätau, to be used to, to be accustomed
to, is expressed by the above construction. Examples:
’Ua mätau vau 7 te haere ’e ti 7 7 te ’anani.
I am used to going to pick oranges.
(Lit. I am used to the going and pick oranges)
’Ua mätau vau 7 te rave 7 te ’ohipa.
I am used to working.
(ix) ’e + verb + subject
This construction is used to indicate any future tense, and may be set
out as follows:
’e haere au 7 te ’oire
’e haere ’oe 7 te ’oire
’e haere ’oia 7 te ’oire
’e haere täua 7 te ’oire
’e haere rnaua 7 te ’oire
’e haere ’orua 7 te ’oire
’e haere räua 7 te ’oire
’e haere tätou 7 te ’oire
’e haere mätou 7 te ’oire
’e haere ’outou 7 te ’oire
I shall go to town
you will go to town
he/she will go to town
we (dl inc.) shall go to town
we (dl exc.) shall go to town
you two will go to town
they two will go to town
we (pi. inc.) shall go to town
we (pi. exc.) shall go to town
you (pi.) will go to town
they will go to town
the man will kill a pig
Terii will kill a pig
’e haere rätou 7 te ’oire
’e tupa’i te ta’ata 7 te ho’e pua’a
’e tupa’i ’o Teri’i 7 te ho’e pua’a
If emphasis is sought, the subject may precede the verb. Thus:
’Ananahi vau ’e haere ai 7 te mätete.
Tomorrow I shall go to the market.
The directional, ai, is explained in §81(d), and may be ignored for
purposes of this lesson.
(x) mai + verb + roa + subject
This is the construction used to indicate the frustrative form of the
verb, “almost, nearly”. Examples:
mai pohe roa ’oia he nearly died
mai fati roa to’u ’avae I nearly broke my leg
mai hohoni roa te ’uri ’ia’u the dog almost bit me
(b) Special Verb Fillers. In European languages, the verb slot in
the sentence is usually filled by what is known as a verb. In Tahitian,
as we have just seen above, this is the case also in the majority of
cases. However, it is not uncommon for the verb slot to be filled by a
part of speech other than a verb in the Tahitian sentence.
THE VERB 37
In Tahitian, the verb slot in the sentence may also be filled by
a noun, an adjective, or an interrogative. Examples will make the
point clear:
’Ua mata’i 7 teie nei.
It is blowing now.
(Lit. it winds now)
’E ’ava’e tatou 7 Maupiti.
We will spend a month on Maupiti.
(Lit. will month we on Maupiti)
’Ua tapati au 7 Pape’ete.
I spent Sunday in Papeete.
’Ua haumi te fenua.
The ground is wet.
’Ua maoro ’oia 7 tana ’ohipa.
He is late for work.
Te aha ra tera vahine?
What is that woman doing?
(c) Nouns Formed from Verbs. In Tahitian, verbs expressing
movement or state may become abstract nouns when preceded by the
article te. Examples:
mana’o to think te mana’o thought
ta’oto to sleep te ta’oto sleep
mata’u to fear te mata’u fear
ora to live te ora life
More commonly, the nominalising suffix -ra’a converts verbs into
nouns, almost without exception. In this case, the resulting noun
form is participial in sense; that is, the noun becomes an action noun.
The principle will become clear when the following examples are
considered:
pure to pray te purera’a the prayer, praying
tamci ’a to eat te tama’ara’a the feast, feasting
hoe to row te hoera’a the rowing
tae to arrive te taera’a the arrival
hapono to send te haponora’a the sending
’äu to swim te ’aura’a the swimming
hamani to build te hamanira’a the making
pafa’i to gather te pafa’ira’a the gathering
47. Passive Verbs
The passive in Tahitian will be treated in three sections,
(i) verb + hia + subject + object + agent
38 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
The passive form of the verb consists in placing hia* after the verb
stem. Examples:
’Ua hohoni hia ’oia ’e te ’uri. He was bitten by the dog.
’Ua ’ia Ilia tona täüpo’o. His hat was stolen.
7 ta’iri hia na vau. I was whipped.
’E ta’iri hia vau. I shall be whipped.
Hia has been considered best kept apart from the verb stem and not
joined as a suffix, as adverbs may be placed between the stem and
hia to describe manner. This construction will be explained in §85.
Hia is replaced by -a to indicate a recent past passive. Examples:
rave to take ’amu to eat
ravea taken (recent) ’amua eaten (recent)
rave hia taken (general) ’amu hia eaten (general)
’Ua ravea te täüpo’o ’e ’o Teri’i.
The hat was taken by Terii.
At this point it should be noted that the agentive article in Tahitian
has two forms, 7 for inanimate agents and ’e for animate agents.
Examples:
’Ua hohoni hia ’oia ’e te ma’o.
He was bitten by a shark.
’Ua horo’a hia te tao’a ’e te tamaroa iti.
The gift was given by the small boy.
But: ’E haere au ’e ta’iri 7 te ’uri 7 te ’ama’a rä’au.
I shall go and hit the dog with a stick.
With pronoun agents, the forms are as follows:
’e au by me ’e raua by them (dl)
’e ’oe by you ’e iätou by us (pi. inc.)
’e ana by him ’e matou by us (pi. exc.)
’e täua by us (dl inc.) 'e ’outou by you (pi.)
’e mäua by us (dl exc.) ’e ratou by them (pi.)
’e ’orua by you (dl)
Example:
’Ua tupa’i hia te ’uri ’e ana.
The dog was hit by him.
(ii) na + agent + verb + subject
This is the construction used when the emphasis rests on the agent,
rather than on the action. Examples:
Na te tavana 7 taparahi ha’apohe te ma’o.|
* Except when the fi-al syllable of the verb is -hi, or sometimes when the
pass ve marker is -a; e.g. vavahi (to split), vavahia (split).
t 7, the sign of the object, is often omitted in the past tense with this construction.
THE VERB 39
The shark was killed by the chief.
(Lit. by the chief killed the shark)
Nä te tamaroa iti 7 horo’a atu 7 te tao’a.
The gift was given by the small boy.
The verb remains in the active form in this construction. When this
emphatic construction is used, 7 indicates all past tense, while ’e
indicates future and present tense.
(iii) verbs without hia
Certain verbs in Tahitian may not take the passive marker hia. They
are as follows:
rava’i , „ . ma 'e to be lifted
nava’i t0 su“lcient mar a ’a to be raised
noa,’ a to ,b e ob. ta.in.ed ti 'a to be able roa a nehenehe to be able
ta’a to be certain hemo to be surpassed
mo’e to be forgotten re to be victorious
The following sentences illustrate their usage. It will be observed
that these verbs are unlike those seen so far in that they are mainly
impersonal. Examples:
’Uanava’i te mci’a.
There is enough food.
’Ua noa’a tä tatou pia.
We have got some beer.
’Ua ta’a ’ia’u 7 te f a ’ahoro 7 te pere’o’o-uira.
I know how to drive a car.
’Ua mo’e ’ia’u te titeti manureva.
I have forgotten my plane-ticket.
’Ua ma’e ta’u pute puha.
I was able to lift my sack of copra.
’Ua mara’a te moni ’o te püha.
The price of copra has risen.
’E ti ’a ’ia ’u ’ia tauturu ’ia ’oe.
I can help you.
’E nehenehe ia ’u ’e tauturu ’ia ’oe.
I can help you.
’Ua hemo to Teri’i va’a 7 to Marama.
Terii’s boat has passed Marama’s.
’Ua re ’ia Moana.
Moana has won.
It is not necessary to study part (iii) of this section intensively at this
stage. After Lesson 19 it will be clearer. It is better for the moment to
practise using the passive forms given in parts (i) and (ii).
40 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
48. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. ’Ua tama’a vau. 2. ’Ua hina’aro ’oia 7 te ho'e afata. 3. ’E ta’i
ratou. 4. Te haere nei ’orua 7 te ’oire. 5. Te horo’a ra ’oia 7 te tao’a.
6. Te inu ra rätou 7 te pia. 7. 7 tupa’i na te ta’ata 7 te ho’e pua’a.
8. Te hi’o ra te mau vahine 7 te miti. 9. ’E ’amu te ta’ata 7 te vi.
10. Te horo nei te mau tamäroa. 11. ’Ua tupa’i hia te honu ’e te mau
feiä ta'i’a. 12. ’Ua hohoni hia te ta’ata ’e te ma’o. 13. ’E tupa’i au
7 te ’uri 7 te ’ama’a ra 'au. 14. ’Ua ma’iti hia ’oia ’ei mero no te
Apo’ora’a Rahi. 15. Nä’u 7 tunu 7 te üfi. 16. Na te poti’i ra 7 tanu
7 te tiare. 17. Nä ’outou ’e täpü 7 te vahie. 18. Te tanu hia nei te
ho’e tumu ha’ari. 19. ’Ua ’amu hia te ’iore ’e te ’uri. 20. ’Ua tupa’i
hia te ’uri ’e ana.
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. I am eating a mango. 2. He was swimming yesterday. 3. My hat
was stolen yesterday. 4. The girl was looked for by the boy. 5. I
shall cut the wood tomorrow. 6. We two (inc.) shall swim. 7. They
(pi.) were eating mangoes. 8. The dog bit my leg. 9. The chief died
yesterday. 10. Yesterday I bought four books. 11. I like his dog.
12. The girl is looking at the sea. 13. The dog is asleep. 14. He
went to the city. 15. You stole my book.
Lesson 9
THE CAUSATIVE VERB
49. Fa’a- or Ha’a-
In Tahitian there is a verb form, the causative, which is employed
very frequently in conversation. The causative form means “to cause
to be done”, “to have something done” . The prefixes used to form
the causative are fa ’a- or ha’a-.* With a smaller number of verbs,
listed at the end of this section, either f a ’a-or ha’a- may be used as
causative markers; but in the vast majority of verbs these prefixes are
not interchangeable, and the correct marker must be learnt in each
case, as indicated in the glossary. Examples of the causative:
tupu to grow fa ’atupu to make something grow
’ite to know f a ’a’ite to make known, explain
ta 7 to cry fa ’ata 7 to make someone cry
maita’i good ha ’amaita 7 to do good
’ino bad fa ’a ’ino to do evil
’ahu clothes fa ’a ’ahu to clothe someone
nehenehe beautiful f a ’anehenehe to clean
As was pointed out in §46(xi), there are really no such parts of speech
as “verb”, “noun”, “adjective” in Tahitian, each part of speech being
determined solely by the slot it fills and the function it performs in the
sentence. It would therefore be better to speak of a “base” than of a
“part of speech” . It can be seen from the above that “verbs” ,
“nouns”, and “adjectives” may be used to form a causative verb
form. Examples:
tae to arrive f a ’atae to import
’Ua fa ’atae ’oia 7 te mau pua’atoro.
He imported cattle.
nehenehe beautiful f a ’anehenehe to clean
’E fa ’anehenehe mtou 7 te piha.
They are going to clean the room.
* With causative verbs, there are two primary stresses, one on the prefix and
one on the verb stem, as indicated above.
42 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
The following causative forms may take either ha ’a- or fa ’a-* (all
other verbs must always take the prefix prescribed in the glossary).
ha ’apiha to cause to boil ha’apa’apa’a to roast, grill
ha’apo’i to cover up ha’aputa to pierce
ha’apoto to shorten ha ’aputu to gather together
ha ’apuai to exert fa ’a ’afar o to straighten
strength fa ’a’ati to close, accompany
ha’apu’e to gather fa ’afaito to weigh, make equal
together fa ’afarerei to introduce
ha ’apupu to class fa ’afariu to convert
ha’apurara to scatter ha ’amanina to make level
fa ’afatata to bring near ha ’amaoro to delay
fa ’aha 'ama to make ashamed ha 'amarari to disperse
fa ’amahu to be patient ha ’amaramaf
a ’amata’u to terrify rama to enlighten
fa ’arapu to stir ha ’ama tar a to untie
ha’afaufau to debase ha ’amau to establish
ha ’afefe to bend ha ’amau ’a to waste
ha’afifi to entangle ha ’ama ’ue to make fly
ha ’afirifiri to curl ha ’amauiui to inflict pain
ha ’afiu to bore ha ’amaururu to thank, please
ha ’amaheu to discover ha ’amenemene to make round
ha ’amana to authorise ha ’ami ’omi ’o to crumple
ha ’amani 7 to spill ha ’apapu to level, assure
ha ’amo ’e to forget, lose ha’ape’ape’a to annoy
50. Ta-
Ta- is another prefix forming the causative, but with the meaning
“ to put something to use” . Examples:
upo’o head taüpo’o to put on one’s head
tihota sugar tatihota to sugar something
paru bait täparu to beg
51. Causative and Passive
In §47(iii) we saw that certain verb roots are already passive in sense
and cannot take the passive formative hia. There is another short
list of verbs which can take the passive formative hia, but only after
the causative prefixes have been applied. This is because they are
basically passive in meaning. Examining the list will make this
clearer:
fati to be broken oti to be finished
* The more common form only is listed here.
THE CAUSATIVE VERB 43
’ofati to break
matara to become untied
open
ha'amatara to untie
mau to be held fast
tämau to hold, learn
thoroughly
mail’a to be wasted
ha’amah’a to waste
mo’e to be forgotten
ha’amo’e to lose
Examples:
’Ua fati te mau tumu ha’ari.
’Ua ’ofati van ’i te ’ama’a rä’au.
’Ua ’ofati hia te ’ama’a rä’au.
’Ua matara te mau fare toa.
’Ua ha’amatara ’ona 7 te tapona
taura.
’Ua ha’amatara hia te ’opani.
’Ua mau maita’i te taura 7 te
tä ’amu.
’Ua tämau maita’i ’o Heifara 7
tana himene.
’Ua tämau hia te himene.
’Ua mau’a noa te taime.
'Ua ha’amau’a ’ona 7 te taime.
’Ua ha’amau’a hia te taime.
’ Ua mo ’e ’ia ’u.
’Ua ha’amo’e te tohora.
’Ua ha’amo’e hia te mau parau
tahito.
’Ua oti te poti 7 te hamani.
’Ua f a ’aoti te ’ohipa.
’Ua f a ’aoti hia te pur er a ’a.
’Ua papu ’ia’u.
’Ua ha’apapu ’oe.
’Ua ha’apapu hia te hora.
’Ua pan te pape.
’Ua ha’apau ’oia 7 te uaina.
’Ua ha’apau hia te mä’a.
’Ua pohe ’oia.
’Ua tupohe ’oia 7 te mori.
’Ua tupohe hia te mori.
f a ’aoti to finish
papü to be sure
ha ’apapu to assure
pan to be consumed
ha’apau to consume
pohe to be dead
tupohe to kill, put out a light
riro to become, to be taken
possession of
f a ’ariro to accept
The coconut trees are broken.
I broke the branches.
The branches have been broken.
The shops are open.
He untied the knot in the rope.
The door is ajar.
The rope has been well tied.
Heifara has learnt her song well.
The song has been learnt.
It is a waste of time.
He has wasted his time.
Time has been wasted.
I have forgotten.
The whale has submerged again.
The old legends are forgotten.
The boat has been finished.
The work is finished.
The prayer has ended.
I am sure.
You have explained.
The time has been set.
The water is used up.
He drank all the wine.
The food has been consumed.
He is dead.
He put out the light.
The light has been put out.
44 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
’Ua riro ’oia ’ei tavana. He has become the mayor.
’Ua fa ’ariro ’oia 7 torn pere’o’o. He has sold his car.
’Ua fa ’ariro hia 'oia ’ei ta’ata He has been made a French
Farani. citizen.
52. Noun + hia
In Tahitian any common noun may become a passive impersonal
verb, simply by the addition of hia to the noun itself. Examples:
ta’ata man, person ta’atahia to become populous
mä’a food ma’ahia to become fruitful
mahana sun mahanahia to become sunny
Thus: ’E ’ita ’e ta’atahia 7 te ’oire ’ananahi.
There will be nobody in town tomorrow.
53. Dual Forms of the Verb
When a movement or action is performed by two persons together,
the form of some verbs is subject to partial reduplication, usually of
the first syllable. Examples:
horo to run
haere to go
reva to leave
parau to converse
ta’oto to sleep
54. Intensified Verbs
When an action or movement is repeated several times or very often,
the form of several verbs is subject to complete or almost complete
reduplication. Thus:
parau to converse parauparau to talk a lot
hi ’o to look at hi ’ohi ’o to stare at
hoe to row hoehoe to row here and there
pätia to prick, spear patiatia to prick several times
rave to do, make raverave to manipulate
lioroi to wash horohowi to wash repeatedly
When a statement or decision is stressed, ia immediately following
the verb acts as an intensifying particle. Examples:
’E ta’oto ia te mau ta’ata 7 uta 7 ter a fa’a.
The people will sleep at the bottom of the valley.
’E riro ia te ’oire no Pape’ete ’ei mat a ’it a ’ir a ’a na te mau feia
rötere.
Papeete is becoming the delight of the tourists.
hohoro to run (two together)
hahaere to go (two together)
rereva to leave (two together)
paraparau to converse (two
together)
ta’o’oto to sleep (two together)
THE CAUSATIVE VERB 45
55. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. ’Ua f a ’atupu ’oia 7 te vi. 2. ’Ua ha’aparari ratou 7 te man hapaina.
3. ’E f a ’atae mai vaii 7 ta’u tauiha’a. 4. ’Ua ha’amani’i ’oe 7 te u.
5. ’Ua f a ’atupa’i ’oia 7 te ho’e pua’a. 6. Te h i’ohi’o ra rätou 7 temau
p o ti’i. 7. ’E hahaere raua 7 te matete. 8. ’Ua rereva atu tau na
ta’ata. 9. Te parauparau nei te mau p o ti’i. 10. 7 ta’o ’oto na maua.
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. All the dry coconuts are gathered up. 2. She will clean the room.
3. It is covered up. 4. 1 shall conclude our conversation. 5. The net
is closed off. 6. I shall explain to him. 7. A feast was organised.
8. Cattle are imported to Tahiti. 9. The men paddled about.
10. He stared at the fish.
Lesson 10
THE NEGATIVE
The negative particles in Tahitian are as follows:
’ait a ’e ’ore
’aore ’e ’ere
’e ’ita
56. ’Aita and ’Aore
’Aita or ’aore are used to indicate negation with present or past
tense. The negative particle always precedes the subject and the verb.
With a negative sentence the word order is as follows:
negative particle + subject + verb + object
Examples:
’Aita te ta’ata 7 hohoni hia ’e te ’uri.
The man was not bitten by the dog.
’Aita vau 7 rave 7 te ’ohipa 7 teiepo’ipo’i.
I did not work this morning.
’A it a vau ’e tama’a nei.*
I am not eating.
’Aita ta’u vahie 7 oti 7 te tcipu.
I have not finished cutting the wood.
’A it a vau ’e ’a mu ra.
I was not eating.
’Aore may be used instead of 'aita, and has a more emphatic quality.
Example:
’Aore au 7 tupa’i ’iana. I did not hit him.
57. ’E ’ita and ’E’ore
’E ’ita or ’e’ore are used to indicate negation with future tense. The
word order remains the same as for the present and past negative.
Examples:
’E ’ita vau ’e haere 7 teie nei 7 te mätete.
I shall not go to the market now.
* Note that ’e replaces the te of the present affirmative construction.
THE NEGATIVE 47
’E ’it a te ta’ata ’e hohoni hia ’e te ’uri.
The man will not be bitten by the dog.
’E ’ore has a stronger force than ’e ’ita, in the same way that ’aore,
is more emphatic than ’aita. Example:
’E ’ore roa ratou ’e tae mai. They will never arrive.
58. ’E ’ere
’E ’ere is used in negative statements such as “there is not”, “it is not” .
This type of negation is used mainly with sentences of the type not
containing a verb in Tahitian. A few examples will make it clear:
’E ’ere 7 te mea ’ohie. It is not easy.
(Lit. it is not a thing easy)
’E ’ere ’oia 7 te mea puai. He is not strong.
(Lit. he is not a thing strong)
’E ’ere is also used to negate the verbal sentence type explained in
§47(ii). Thus:
’E ’ere na’u 7 rave 7 te puta. It was not I who took the book.
A detailed explanation of the uses of ’e ’ere with non-verbal sentence
types will be found in §§73 and 74.
59. Negative + Roa
Roa, immediately following any of the negative particles, corresponds
to “never”. Examples:
’Aita roa vau 7 ’ite. I have never seen it.
’E ’ore roa ratou ’e tae mai. They will never arrive.
60. 'Aitea and ’Aore a
’Aitea and ’aore a correspond to the English “not yet”, and occupy
the same position in the sentence as ’aita. Examples:
’Aitea ’ona 7 haere mai. He has not yet come.
’Aore a ’ona 7 ’ite 7 te
mid. He has not seen the sea yet.
61. ’Ore
’Ore is often placed after the verb, and corresponds to the English
“without” . Example:
’E rave tana 7 te ’ohipa mai te fa ’aea ’ore.
We shall work without stopping.
(Lit. will do we the work with the stop without)
’Ore is also used as a negative verb in such sentences as:
No te aha ’oe ’e ’ore ai ’e ’au?
Why don’t you swim?
48 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
’la ’ore ’oia ’e ’amu f a ’ahou 7 te mau ta’ata.
Lest he eat men again.
Further reference to ’ore as a verb is made in §98.
Some adverbs and adjectives take on a negative sense when followed
by ’ore. Examples:
pinepine often pinepine ’ore rarely
tu’utu’u slack tu’utu’u ’ore continually
nehenehe possible nehenehe ’ore impossible
62. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. ’Ait a te poti’i 7 p a ’imi hia ’e te taure’ore’a tone. 2. ’A it a iona
taupo’o 7 ’ia hia ’inanahi ra. 3. ’Aita ’o Moana ’e ta’oto ra. 4. ’Aita
te fenua 7 haumi. 5. ’A it a vau ’e tai’o nei. 6. ’E ’ore vau ’e täpü 7 te
vahie. 7. ’E ’ore ’oe ’e inn 7 te uaina. 8. ’E ’ita ’oia ’e ’ciu. 9. ’E ’ita
rätou ’e haere 7 te matete. 10. ’Aore vau ’e tama’a nei.
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. I shall not go to the market. 2. The gift was not given to the chief.
3. The men did not arrive. 4. I am not eating. 5. You (pi.) did not
eat. 6. The dog will not bite the man. 7. Peu is not swimming. 8.
I shall not eat the yams. 9. The woman did not plant the coconuts.
10. They (pi.) are not children.
Lesson 11
VERBAL SENTENCE TYPES
Vocabulary:
te tao’a the present reva to leave
te tavana the mayor tae to arrive
te tavana rahi the Governor fa ’ari 7 to receive
te mata ’eina ’a the district fa ’atupu to organise
te tämä’ara’a the feast fa ’a ’ite to explain
te pae moana the edge of the tu’u to put down
lagoon mana ’o to think
te fare toa the shop tupu to exist, grow
te piripou the trousers ti 7 to get, pick
Ua to rain hina ’aro to want
patiri to thunder rave to do, make, take
vai to be, exist maita’i well
This lesson constitutes a revision of all the lessons so far, with emphasis
on practice in sentence formation. Each verbal sentence type will
be expressed in terms of a formula, since word order in the Tahitian
sentence is unlike that of English or French.
63. Intransitive
When the verb is intransitive, the order is as follows:
verb + subject
Examples:
’Ua haere au 7 te matete. I went to the market.
’Ua tae mai vau 7 te hora piti. I arrived at two o’clock.
64. Transitive
With transitive verbs, the word order is as follows:
verb + subject + direct object
Examples:
’E tupa’i vau 7 te hb’e pua’a. I shall kill a pig.
’Ua ’amu vau 7 te f e 7. I ate a red banana.
50 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
65. Dual Object
When a second object or indirect object is expressed, it follows the
first object. Thus:
verb + subject + object + indirect object
Examples:
’Ua horo’a atu vau 7 te ho’e tao’a ’iana.
I gave him a present.
’Ua papa 7 vau 7 te rata ’iana ’inanahi ra.
I wrote him a letter yesterday.
66. Attributive
When an attributive sentence is constructed, the attribute follows the
direct object and is preceded by the particle ’ei, the attributive marker.
Example:
’Ua ma’iti ratou ’iana ’ei tavana.
They elected him mayor.
67. Passive
With a passive verb the word order is as follows:
verb + subject + agent
Examples:
’Ua hohoni hia ’oia ’e te ’uri. He was bitten by the dog.
’Ua tape'a hia ’oia ’e te muto’i. He was arrested by the police.
68. Passive Indirect Object
When a passive verb has an indirect object, the word order is:
verb + subject + indirect object + agent
Example:
’Ua horo’a hia te tao’a 7 te tamaiti ’e te tavana.
The present was given to the boy by the chief.
With the passive attributive (cf. §66), the word order is:
verb + subject + attribute
Example:
’Ua ma’iti hia ’oia ’ei tavana. He was elected mayor.
VERBAL SENTENCE TYPES 51
69. Impersonal Verbs
There exists a series of impersonal verbs in Tahitian, used with
reference to the weather. Examples:
’e ua it will rain
te üa nei it is raining
’e patiri it thunders
These verbs follow the pattern set out for the verbs above, with the
exception that the subject is not expressed.
70. Vai
This verb means “to be present, to exist, to be in a certain state” .
It follows the regular pattern of the verbs discussed above, but does
not occur in the passive form. Examples:
te vai nei au I am te vai ra vau I was
te vai nei ’oe you are te vai ra ’oe you were
te vai nei ’oia he is te vai ra ’oia he was
Te vai ra te ho’e ta’ata teipapa’i 7 taua ’a ’amu ra.
There was a man who wrote that story.
This verb, however, must NOT be used to translate such sentences as
“I am sick”, “he is well”, etc., but must be used with sentences of the
type “there was a man .. . .” Sentence types such as “I am well” are
non-verbal in Tahitian, and will be explained in §73.
71. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. ’Uarevacitumaua. 2. Te vai nei te mau motu Tuamotu. 3. ’Etae
’oia 7 te mata’eina’a no Pa’ea. 4. ’E haere atu ’oia 7 Mataiea.
5. ’Ua f a ’arPi hia ’oia ’e te ari’i vahine. 6. ’Ua fa ’atupu hia te hö’e
tama’ara’a. 7. ’E f a ’a ’ite vau ’iana 7 te huru no te ’ohipa. 8. ’E tu ’u
ratou 7 te ’upe’a. 9. ’E haere rätou 7 te pae moana. 10. Te mana’o
nei maua ’e haere ätu 7 te mau motu.
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. You two will eat well today. 2. All the men will go. 3. They (pi.)
went in the morning. 4. They (pi.) will eat. 5. There are flowers in
all the islands. 6. That flower does not grow in all places. 7. You
(pi.) picked that flower. 8. We (pi. inc.) are going into a shop.
9. I want a pair of trousers. 10. I will take it.
E
Lesson 12
NON-VERBAL SENTENCES
In Tahitian there exists a series of sentences in which there is no verb.
This phenomenon is common in Oceanic languages, but quite strange
to speakers of European languages. These sentences are extremely
common in everyday speech, and warrant particular attention and
study on the part of the student.
72. It is, There is
The first type of non-verbal sentence corresponds to the English
sentence type, “it is/there is/there are”.
Note: Throughout this grammar Tahitian is explained in its own
terms, but in the case of Tahitian non-verbal sentences an explanation
in terms of English will clarify their structure and usage.
(i) This type of sentence consists of the particle ’e (it is/there is),
a noun, and a locative/temporal phrase. Examples:
’E naonao to ’onei. There are mosquitoes here.
’E ta’urua to 'ananahi. There is a feast tomorrow.
’E i ’a to roto 7 te ’upe’a. There are fish in the net.
It can be seen from these examples that the first part consists of
’e + noun, while the second consists of to + locative/temporal phrase.
The first part alone constitutes a sentence in response to a question.
Example:
’E aha ter a? What is that?
’E ma’a tahiti. It is Tahitian food.
’E changes to ’o when the subject is a pronoun or proper noun.
Example:
’O vau. It is I.
V Teri’i. It is Terii.
With this first type of non-verbal sentence the negative is formed by
placing the negative particle ’aita before the affirmative sentence.
Thus:
’Aita ’e naonao to ’onei. There are no mosquitoes here.
’Aita ’e ta’urua to ’ananahi. There is no feast tomorrow.
NON-VERBAL SENTENCES 53
Instead of simply ’aita, there is a series of negatives for this sentence
type which will be listed in order of increasing intensity:
’Aore re’a ’e ta’ata. There is hardly anyone.
’Aita ’e ta’ata. There is no-one.
’Aita roa ’e ta’ata. There is no-one.
’Aore ’e ta’ata. There is no-one.
’Aore roa ’e ta’ata. There is no-one (absolute).
(ii) A sub-type of the sentence construction explained above
consists of:
’e -f numeral adjective + noun
This structure corresponds to such sentences as “there are many___”
The numeral adjective may be either raverahi or raverau. Examples:
’E raverahi mau rötere. There are many tourists.
’E raverau mau ta’ata. There are many men.
Raverahi indicates many of the same kind, while raverau indicates
many of different kinds.
When a dependent clause follows this type of sentence, the definite
article te is sometimes inserted. Example:
’e raverahi te mau rötere . . . there are many tourists who . . .
73. Identificational
The second type of non-verbal sentence in Tahitian corresponds to
the English type, “he is strong”, or “the ground is wet”. In other
words, the first part of the utterance is composed of a noun qualified
by an adjective, and the second is filled by a noun or pronoun. This
may be summarised in the formula:
noun + adjective
noun
pronoun
Examples:
’E mea marö te ha’ari*
The coconuts are dry.
(Lit. is a thing dry the coconuts)
’E mea pa’ari te üfi.
The yams are hard.
(Lit. is a thing hard the yams)
’E ta’ata puai ’oia.
He is strong.
(Lit. is a man strong he)
* This contrasts with:
’ua mard te ha’ari
which suggests that the coconuts have become dry, but were previously wet.
54 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
’E mea au na u fera hei-pupu.
1 like that shell necklace.
As with the first type of non-verbal sentence, the first part alone
may constitute a sentence in response to a question, or when the
context is known. Example:
’E mea ’ohie. It is easy.
The negative of this second non-verbal sentence type may take two
forms:
(i) ’e ’ere
Examples:
’E ’ere 7 te mea ’ohie. It is not easy.
’E ’ere ’oia 7 te mea puai. He is not strong.
(ii) ’aita
With any sentence of the form ’e mea, etc., the adjective may
become a verb in the negative. Examples:
’e mea haumi te fenua
the ground is wet
i
’aita te fenua 7 haumi
’e mea pa’ari te üfi
the yams are hard
4
’aita te ufi 7 pa’ari
74. Equational
The third type of non-verbal sentence in Tahitian is equational, of
the type “that is a coconut tree”, “that is my father”. It may take
two forms, as follows:
(i) ’e + noun + demonstrative
Example:
’E tumu ha’ari tera. That is a coconut tree.
(Lit. is a coconut tree that)
(ii) demonstrative + noun
Example:
Tera to’u metua täne. That is my father.
(Lit. that my father)
The negative of this sentence type is the same as for §73. Example:
’E ’ere tera ta’ata tö’u metua täne.
That man is not my father.
NON-VERBAL SENTENCES 55
75. To have
(i) The last type of non-verbal sentence translates the English
“to have” . It is composed of:
’e + noun + possessive pronoun
Examples:
’E ’ava’ava ta’u. I have some cigarettes.
(Lit. are cigarettes mine)
They have a dog.
I have a head.
That man has a nice house.
’E ’uri ta ratou.
’E itpo’o tb’u.
’E fare nehenehe to tera
ta ’ata.
Note: The possessive pronouns are identical to the possessive
adjectives listed in §37.
(ii) When possession is stressed, such as in the reply to the question,
“whose are the cigarettes?” (those are my cigarettes), the word order
explained for this last non-verbal sentence is reversed, na or no
replacing the ta or to* Examples:
Na’u tera ’ava’ava. Those are my cigarettes.
(Lit. for me those cigarettes)
Nd’u tera va’a. That is my outrigger canoe.
When possession is emphasised, as above, nouns normally taking
the possessive particle ta, na, ’a, may change to to, no, ’o, in order to
stress absolute ownership. Example:
Na vai tera uati? Whose is that watch?
Nb’u tera uati. That is my watch.
(iii) When a numeral occurs with “to have”, as in “I have two
pigs”, the word order is:
’e + numeral + possessed noun
Example:
’Epiti tanapua’a. He has two pigs.
(Lit. is two his pigs)
(iv) The negative of the basic sentence type described in §75(i) is
formed by placing ’aita before the possessive pronoun. The following
formula will make it clear:
’aita'
’aore + possessive pronoun + ’e + noun
* The no, nä form has a bensfactive overtone, absent from the to, tä form.
56 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
Examples:
’Aita ta’u ’e vahine. I have no wife.
(Lit. not mine is wife)
I have no cigarettes.
That man has not got a nice
’Aita ta’u ’e ’ava’ava.
’Aita to tera ta’ata ’e fare
nehenehe. house.
76. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. ’E mea haumi te fenua. 2. Teie ta ’u vahine f a ’aipoipo. 3. ’E
piti ta’u pua’a. 4. ’E ’urimaita’iiaratou. 5. Tera torn fare. 6. ’Aita
te ufi ’i p a ’ari. 7. ’E mea rahi roa tera ta’ata. 8. ’E mea nehenehe
tera p o ti’i. 9. ’E ’ere ’i te mea iti. 10. ’Aita tä maua ’e moni.
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. The road is long. 2. It is not long. 3. There are pawpaws here.
4. There is a feast tomorrow. 5. The chief has some pigs. 6. I have
no house. 7. He has two hands. 8. The orange is very good.
9. They (pi.) have no money. 10. He is not strong.
Lesson 13
TIME AND FREQUENCY
By this time the student will be able to conduct a simple conversation
in Tahitian, and before we move from statement sentences to other
types, such as interrogative and dependent sentences, we will examine
phrases, such as time and location, which may be included in any
sentence type, be it statement or otherwise.
77. Time Phrases
’inanahi yesterday
’inanahi ätura the day before yesterday
7 napo ra last night
7 teie mahana today
7 te ie p o ’ipo’i this morning (6-10 a.m.)
7 teie avatea this morning (10 a.m.-noon)
7 teie ahiahi this afternoon (noon-6 p.m.)
7 teie po
7 teie ru’i tonight (6 p.m.-midnight)
7 teie a ’ahiata tonight (midnight-6 a.m.)
’ananahi tomorrow
’ananahi atu the day after tomorrow
’ananahi ’ia po ’ipo 7 tomorrow morning
’ananahi ’ia pö
’a napo tomorrow night
7 teie nei
7 teie taime now
hou ’a
nä mua a ’e before (plus verb)
nä mua before, first
nä mua a ’e 7 before (plus noun)
7 reira
7 te reira taime
ihora
ätura
then, at that time
then
7 muri iho then, after that
a ’e ra then, thereupon
58 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
mai te mahcina
’e tae noa atu
7 muta ’a ihora
fatata
since
until
formerly
soon
The time phrase or adverb is usually placed either at the beginning
or at the end of the clause or sentence. Examples:
’Ananahi ’e haere ai vau ’e ’äu.
Tomorrow I shall go swimming.
’E reva ätu vau 7 teie po.
I shall leave tonight.
Hou ’a tupu ai teie ’oro’a rahi . . . .
Before this big celebration takes place . . . .
’E nehenehe ta ’oe ’e rave na mua.
You may take some first.
Na mua a ’e 7 te reira, te rave ra ’oia 7 te ’ohipa f a ’a ’apu.
Before that, he was a farmer.
7 reira to ’u fare reira ’a ’iäna.
It was then that I met him.
'Ua haere ihora ’oia ’e pipi 7 te tiare.
Then he went and watered the flowers.
’Ua tapu atura ’oia 7 te vahie.
Then he cut the wood.
7 muri iho, ’ua pohe ’oia.
After that, he died.
’Ua t i ’a a ’e ra ’oia 7 n i’a.
Thereupon he stood up.
Mai te mahana 7 reva ätu ai ’oe, ’aita te Jure i taui.
Since you left, the house has not changed.
Mai te hora piti ’e tae noa atu 7 te hora pae.
From two until five o’clock.
7 muta’a ihora ’aita te mau feiä ma’ohi ’e ’amu 7 te ma’apopa’a.
Formerly the Polynesians did not eat European food.
Fatata, “soon”, has a verbal constructionunliketheothertimephrases,
as follows:
’Ua fatata te taime ’e parauparau ai vau 7 te reo Tahiti.
I will soon speak Tahitian.
(Lit. is near the time will speak I Tahitian)
78. Frequency Phrases
Related to time phrases are adverbs of frequency, which do not
usually occupy the same position in the sentence as the time phrases
listed above. Some common frequency expressions are:
pinepine often
TIME AND FREQUENCY 59
noa, noa ra
ena
a ’e nei
a
fa ’ahou
7 te tahi man taime
always, still, again
already (distant)
already (recent)
still
again, once more
from time to time
Adverbs of frequency always follow immediately the verb stem to
which they refer. Examples:
’E haere pinepine mai au
7 ’onei.
’E haere pinepine au 7 te
’oire.
Te ta’oto noa ra ’oia.
’Ua reva ena ’oia.
’Ua ’amu a ’e nei au.
E hina’aro a ’oe 7 te
’ava ’ava ?
’E ho 7 fa ’ahou mai a ’oe ?
T te tahi mau taime ’e
haere ’oia ’e ’au.
I come here often.
I often go to town.
He is still asleep.
He has already left.
I have already eaten.
Do you want another cigarette?
Will you come back again?
He goes swimming from time
to time.
79. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. Tnanahi atura ’ua haere au ’e tai’a. 2. T teie po’ipo’i ’ua ta ’i au.
3. 7 teie ahiahi ’e haere tatou ’e ho’o mai 7 te faraoa. 4. ’Ananahi ’ia
p o ’ipo’i ’e haere täua ’e rave 7 te ’ohipa. 5. 7 teie po ’e ta’oto vau 7
te fare. 6. ’Ananahi ’e ho’o mai vau 7 te pere’o ’o. 7. ’Ua ta’i pinepine
te tamahine. 8. T e ’amu noa r a ’o Teri’i. 9. 'Uahoro’a a t u ’oia
7 te puta ’inanahi ra. 10. ’Ua ’ite vau 7 te p o ti’i ’inanahi ätura.
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. I saw you yesterday. 2. The dog bit the boy today. 3. Yesterday
my hat was stolen. 4. Tomorrow I shall write a letter. 5. We
(pi. inc.) will soon arrive in Tahiti. 6. Tomorrow morning they (pi.)
are going fishing. 7. Yesterday the dog bit my leg. 8. This afternoon
we (pi. inc.) shall go to town. 9. Tonight we (pi. inc.) will eat Peu’s
pig. 10. Yesterday I saw some beautiful flowers.
Lesson 14
LOCATION AND DIRECTION
80. Location
In Tahitian there is a series of locational adverb phrases, as follows:
7 raro a ’e under
7 raro low down
nä raro low, low down
7 ni’a a ’e above
nä ni ’a a ’e above
7 ni ’a iho on, up on
7 piha’i iho beside
7 roto in, into, inside
nä roto from in, from inside
7 ropu in the middle
7 rotopu among
nä ropu between
7 rapae outside
7 muri mai behind, at the back of
nä muri mai behind
7 mu a to the front
7 mua mai in front of, at the front
nä mua mai in front of
7 ’onei here
’e tae noa ätu as far as
’e ’ati noa ä ’e around
mai from
no from
7, ’ei, tei in, at, to
There are two positions in the sentence in which the location
adverb phrases normally occur.
(i) With non-verbal sentences, the location phrase is often placed
at the beginning of the sentence; observe that 7 becomes tei in this
position. Examples:
Tei raro a’e te ’uri 7 te ’amura’ama’a.
The dog is under the table.
LOCATION AND DIRECTION 61
Tei raro te ma’a ha’ari.
The coconuts are down (on the ground).
Tei ni’a a ’e te manureva 7 te ’oire.
The aeroplane is above the town.
Tei ni’a iho teputa 7 te ’amura’ama’a.
The book is on the table.
Tei piha’i iho te parahira’a 7 te ’amura’ama’a.
The chair is beside the table.
Tei roto tei'a 7 te ’upe’a.
The fish is in the net.
Tei ropu te pain 7 te ava.
The steamer is in the middle of the passage.
Tei rotopu te tavana 7 te hui ra’atira.
The chief is among the people.
Tei rapae te mau p e ’ue.
The mats are outside.
Tei muri mai te tumu ’uru 7 te fare.
The breadfruit tree is behind the house.
Tei mua mai te pere’o ’o uira 7 te fare.
The car is in front of the house.
Tei ’onei te mau poti 7 purotu.
The beautiful girls are here.
Tei te fare te mau manihini.
The guests are at the house.
Tei Pape’ete ’oia ’inanahi.
He was in Papeete yesterday.
But: ’Ei Pape’ete ’oia ’ananahi.
He will be in Papeete tomorrow.
Note that tei is replaced by ’ei when future tense is indicated.
With the type of Stative sentence, “there is a . . as explained in
§72, the pattern there outlined is followed. Example:
’E i ’a to roto 7 te miti.
There is a fish in the water.
(ii) With verbal sentence types, the adverbial location phrase is
normally found after the verb. As the location adverb phrases occur
often in conversation, each of the phrases is exemplified in verbal as
well as non-verbal sentences, as follows:
’Ua ori haere ’oia 7 raro a ’e 7 te tumu ha’ari.
He walked beneath the coconut palms.
’Ua rere te manureva na raro roa.
The aeroplane flew very low.
’Ua rere te manureva nä ni ’a 7 te ’oire.
The aeroplane flew over the town.
62 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
’E p a ’uma ’oia 7 n i’a iho 7 te tumu ra’au.
He will climb up the tree.
’Ua parahi ’oia 7 piha’i iho ’ia’u.
He sat beside me.
’Ua taora vau 7 te popo 7 roto 7 te miti.
I threw the ball into the sea.
’Ua hitimahuta vau na roto 7 ta’u moemoea.
I woke with a start from my dream.
’£ haere te mau ta’ata 7 ropu 7 te miti na n i’a 7 to ratou va’a.
The men go out into the middle of the water in their canoes
’Ua ori haere ’oia 7 rotopu 7 te hui ra’atira.
He walked among the people.
’Ua haere ’oia na ropu 7 te mau tumu ra’au.
He walked between the trees.
’Ua tatara ’oia 7 tona mau ’aim 7 rapae 7 te afata.
He took his clothes out of the box.
’Ua vaiho vau 7 te tipi 7 muri mai 7 te fare.
I put the knife behind the house.
’Ua ’utaru vau na muri mai 7 te fare.
I weeded behind the house.
A hi ’o 7 mu a!
Look to the front!
’Ua tapu ’ona 7 te tumu ra’au 7 mu a mai 7 te fare.
He cut down the tree in front of the house.
’Ua tanu 'oia 7 te tiare na mua mai 7 te fare.
She planted flowers in front of the house.
’Ua haere mai ’oia 7 ’onei ’inanahi.
He came here yesterday.
’Ua ’au ’ona mai Pape’ete ’e tae a tu 7 Mo’orea.
He swam from Papeete to Moorea.
’Ua haere ’oia ’e ’ati noa a ’e te fare.
He went around the house.
’Ua tae mai ’ona mai te fenua Farani mai.
He has come from France.
’E raverahi mau rötere no te fenua Farani.
There are many tourists from France.
In verbal sentence types, 7 alone corresponds to the English “at,
in, to” . Examples:
7 Tahiti to, in Tahiti 7 te fare to, at the house
7 Farani to, in France 7 b Teri’i to, at Terii’s place
7 te ’oire to, in town 7 ö Peu to, at Peu’s place
7 te pae tahatai to, at the beach
LOCATION AND DIRECTION 63
81. Direction
There are two series of directionals in Tahitian. The first series is as
follows:
mai towards the speaker
ätu away from the speaker
ai movement
Every verb of motion must be accompanied by one of the directional
particles, mai or ätu, if the verb refers to a person as direct or indirect
object. The following formula should be borne in mind during the
explanation of their exact functions:
+ verb +
mai
ätu ± ai
(a) Directional Unexpressed. First let us take a sentence where
there is no reference to person as object or indirect object. Example:
’E haere vau 7 te ’oire.
I shall go to town.
Here none of the directionals is used, because there is no object person
reference.
(b) Ätu. This word indicates movement away from the speaker or
principal object of the sentence towards someone else. Examples:
’E horo’a ätu vau ’ia ’oe 7 te tao’a.
I shall give you a present.
’E parau ätu ’oe ’ia rätou.
You will speak to them.
(c) Mai. Mai indicates movement towards the speaker or focal
point of the sentence by another person or object. Examples:
’Eparau mai ’oe ’ia’u.
You will speak to me.
’E hcro’a mai ’oia 7 te tao’a ’ia’u.
He will give me a present.
’Ua reva mai te pain.
The boat has left (to come towards the speaker).
Mai may also be used to indicate movement towards the focal
point of the sentence, although away from the speaker, especially
with reciprocal actions of the following type:
Let us suppose that two people are talking and that the first person
has said.
’E päpa’i ätu vau ’ia ’oe 7 te rata.
I shall write you a letter.
64 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
In reply to this, the second person might say, “And I shall write you a
letter too”, in Tahitian:
’E papa 7 mai vau ’ia ’oe 7 te rata.
And I shall write you a letter.
In such a case, the focus or principal object of the second sentence
is “you”, thus requiring mai rather than ätu, indicating movement
towards the focal point rather than away from the speaker.
(d) Ai. A directional indicating movement of any type or movement
towards a consequence, ai is used when the verb itself is preceded
by any adverbial phrase denoting present or future time,
location, or situation, without reference to person.* Examples:
7 te hora pae ’e haere ai vau 7 te ’oire.
At five o’clock I shall go to town.
When there is also person reference, as in (b) and (c) above, then
mai ai or atu ai are used. Examples:
7 te hora piti ’e horo ’a mai ai ’oia 7 te tao ’a ’ia ’u.
At two o’clock he will give me a present.
7 te hora piti ’e horo ’a ätu ai vau 7 te tao ’a ’ia ratou.
At two o’clock I shall give them a present.
The second series of directionals in Tahitian is as follows:
nei near the speaker
na near the addressee
ra far from the speaker
This series of directionals applies to nouns, rather than to verbs.
(e) Nei. This indicates that the object is near the speaker, with
overtones of present time. Example:
A rave 7 te tipi nei! Take this knife!
(f) Na. Na indicates that the object is near the addressee in space
and time. Example:
’Ua fa ’aea 'outou 7 Tahiti na. You stayed in Tahiti.
Na is also used in conjunction with the imperative. Thus:
A hi ’o na! Look!
(g) Ra. This indicates an object far from the speaker in space and
time. Examples:
'Ua oti te fare ra. The house is finished.
7 te matamua ra in the beginning
It can be seen that nei, na, and ra are used as tense formatives, as
was seen in §46. However, they may also be used with verbs, when
* It is also used with interrogatives; see §§98-100.
LOCATION AND DIRECTION 65
the idea of space rather than time is uppermost in the mind of the
speaker. Thus, instead of:
one may have:
te ’amu nei au
te ’amu nei ’oe
te ’amu nei au
te ’amu na ’oe
te ’amu ra ’oia
I am eating
you are eating
I am eating
you are eating
he is eating
In this case, the relationship in space is the same as that for the usage
of nei, na, and ra with nouns, as explained above.
Two other directionals in common use are: 7 uta, towards the interior,
towards the land, and 7 tai, towards the sea. Examples:
’E ta’oto te mau ta’ata 7 uta 7 te fa'a.
The men will sleep at the bottom of the valley.
’Ua painu te mau ma’a ha’ari 7 tai.
The coconuts drifted towards the open sea.
82. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. Tei n i’a iho te hapaina 7 te ’amura’ama’a. 2. Tei raro a ’e te
mohina uaina i te ’amura’ama’a. 3. ’E haere vau 7 te ’oire. 4. ’Ua
haere rätou 7 o Teri’i. 5. ’Ua haere mai ’oia. 6. ’E reva atu vau.
7. 7 teie mahcina ’e haere ai vau 7 te ’oire. 8. ’I te hora piti ’e haere
mai ai rätou. 9. ’Ua rave ’oia 7 te ’ohipa ’a taua ta’ata ra. 10. A inu
7 te pape nei.
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. The fish is in the water. 2. There are no fish in the water. 3. The
dog is in front of the house. 4. He is in the tree. 5. The man is
behind the house. 6. You will write me a letter. 7. Today I shall go
to Australia. 8. They (pi.) will arrive at 5 o’clock. 9. The man came.
10. You will tell me.
Lesson 15
OPTIONAL PHRASES
In this lesson we will examine the benefactive, manner, and accompaniment
phrases which may be added to any verbal sentence.
83. Benefactive
The benefactive forms are as follows:
no'u, nä’u for me
no ’oe, nä ’oe for you
nona, nana for him, her
no täua, nä täua for us two (inc.)
no mäua, nä mäua for us two (exc.)
no ’orua, nä ’orua for you two
no räua, nä räua for them two
no tätou, nä tätou for us (inc.)
no mätou, nä mätou for us (exc.)
no ’outou, nä ’outou for you (pi.)
nä rätou, nä rätou for them
nä te tavana no te tavana for the chief
nä Teri’i
no Teri’i for Terii
It can be seen, then, that the benefactive consists of no, nä, followed
by a pronoun, common noun, or proper noun. The use of nö, nä is
the same as that of tö, tä with the possessive adjective in §37. Examples:
’E haere vau ’e rave mai ’i te puta nä ’oe.
I shall go and get a book for you.
’£ haere vau ’e ho ’o mai 7 te va ’a no ’oe.
I shall go and buy a canoe for you.
’E haere au ’e ti 7 7 te mä ’a nä te ’uri.
I shall go and get some food for the dog.
’E haere au ’e ti’i 7 te tia’a no tä’u vahine.
I shall go and get some shoes for my wife.
OPTIONAL PHRASES 67
84. Accompaniment
In Tahitian, accompaniment (= with) may be conveyed in three
different ways, as follows:
(i) e
Examples:
’E haere au ’e öri haere e ta’u ’uri.
I am going for a walk with my dog.
’E haere au 7 te ’oire e taua ta’ata ra.
I shall go to town with that man.
’Ua reva atu van e ’o Pen.
I left with Peu.
(ii) na muri iho
This form is synonymous with e. Examples:
’Ua öri haere vau na muri iho ’ia ’oe.
I went for a walk with you.
’Ua reva ätu ’o Peu na muri iho ’ia Teri 7.
Peu left with Terii.
(iii) When the one who accompanies is a third person or persons,
a pronominal form is often used. Thus:
’Ua reva atu maua ’o Peu.
I left with Peu.
’Ua reva öltu Peu raua ’o Teri 7.
Peu left with Terii.
85. Manner
The manner adverb, telling “how the action was done”, is always
placed immediately after the verb stem and even before the passive
marker hia. Manner prepositional phrases, however, normally
follow the subject.
Some common manner adverbs and prepositional manner phrases
are:
vitiviti quickly
maita’i well
ri’i a little
taere slowly
Examples:
’Ua horo vitiviti ’oia.
He ran fast.
’Ua papu’a maita’i te ’a'ahu 'o’omo.
The shirt was well washed.
ma te puai
mai
na ni ’a
na roto
strongly
like, as
by
by means of
F
68 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
Ta paraparau ri 7 ihoa taua 7 te reo Tahiti.
We must speak Tahitian a little.
’{Ja ta’iri maita’i hia vau.
I was well beaten.
’Ua roa’a ’iana te re nä roto 7 tona itoito.
He won through his courage.
’Ua ’au ’oia ma te puai.
He swam strongly.
Mai ’ia ’oe ’ato’a te hoho’a ’o ta ’oe tamaiti.
Your son is like you.
Mai to’u to ’oe taupo’o.
Your hat is like mine.
'Ua reva ätu ’oia na n i’a 7 te manureva.
He left by plane.
With non-verbal sentences:
’E mea taere tana tämä’a.
He eats slowly.
’E mea vitiviti tana horo.
He runs fast.
Manner is also conveyed by the following construction:
mai te + verb + hia
Example:
’Ua manuia ’oia mai te tauturu hia ’e tona metua tane.
He succeeded with the help of his father.
This construction does not occur often in conversation, and its
usage sometimes suggests accompaniment, as in the following
sentence:
’E tupu ia te tahi ’orira’a hanahana mai te peretiteni hia ’e te
tavana rahi.
There is a grand ball, with the Governor as guest of honour.
86. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. ’E haere vau ’e rave mai 7 te mä’a na ta’u ’uri. 2. ’E ho’o mai vau
7 te parahira’a no to’u fare. 3. ’Ua rave mai vau 7 te ho’e va’a no ’oe.
4. ’E horo’a ätu ’outou 7 te tao’a nä te p o ti’i. 5. ’Ua haere ’oia 7 te
’oire e tana ’uri. 6. ’Ua ’äu maita’i ’oia. 7. ’Ua haere ’o i’oi ’oia ’e
tai’a. 8. ’E mea maita’i täna ’äura’a. 9. Na’u tera puta. 10. ’Ua
ho ’o mai vau 7 te ho ’e pua ’a nä to ’u na metua.
OPTIONAL PHRASES 69
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. I shall buy a hat for you. 2. He bought a fish for his wife. 3. I
bought some fish for the feast. 4. They (pi.) got the book for me.
5. That book is for Terii. 6. I went to town with Peu. 7. He swam
with his dog. 8. He swam fast. 9. He is swimming fast. 10. I made
this canoe for you.
Lesson 16
PURPOSE AND CAUSE
Two important phrase types in Tahitian are the purpose and cause
phrases, which correspond to the English “in order to” and
“ because”.
87. Purpose
There are four methods of indicating purpose in Tahitian, as
follows:
no te + verb ± -ra’a*
’ia + verb
’e + verb
noun + verb
(i) no te + verb
This form is used when purpose is stressed, when the subject of both
verbs is the same. Examples:
’Ua haere ’oia no te rave mai 7 te faräoa.
He went in order to get some bread.
’Ua rave ’oia 7 te to’i no te iapu 7 te vahie.
He took an axe in order to cut the wood.
No te hamanira’a 7 te pcu.
In order to make the posts.
(ii) 7a + verb
This form is used when the subject of both verbs is not the same.
Examples:
Te ’au ra ’oia ’ia riro te re ’iäna.
He swam so the t the prize might go to him.
’Ua ha’amaramarama maita’i vau ’iäna ’ia papu maita’i ’oia.
I explained carefully so that he would understand fully.
* The form without -ra’a occurs more frequently, but either construction may
be used, according to preference.
PURPOSE AND CAUSE 71
(iii) 'e 4- verb
This form is used when consequence rather than purpose is expressed.
Examples:
’Ua haere ’oia ’e pa’imi 7 te pua’a.
He went to look for the pigs.
Te haere nei to ’u metua töne ’e pipi 7 te tiare.
My father is going to water the flowers.
(iv) noun + verb
When the subject and purpose are closely linked, the verb immediately
follows the noun and fills the role of an adjective. Examples:
’E tipi tapu ’ina’i pua’atoro ter a.
That knife is for cutting meat.
’E mau ’uri aua’u pua’a tera.
Those dogs are for hunting pigs.
Note that a verb + -ra’a may also follow a noun as a modifier
without overtones of purpose. Examples:
te parau fa ’a ’it er a ’a
the explanatory words
te taime tanura’a
the planting season
88. Cause
In Tahitian there are three methods of indicating cause, as follows:
no te mea
no + possessive adjective + verb + -ra’a
na roto 7
(i) no te mea
This is the form most commonly used to indicate cause. Examples:
’Ua ’iria ’oia no te mea ’ua parari ’ia’u te hi’o no te
ha ’amaramarama.
He is angry because I broke the window-panes.
’Ua ma’i hia vau no te mea ’ua ’amu vau 7 te i ’a ta’aero.
I am sick because I ate bad fish.
7 täpu na vau 7 te vahie no te mea ’aita ’e value no te tunura ’a 7
te ma’a.
I cut the wood because there was no wood to cook the food.
(ii) no + possessive adjective + verb + -ra’a
Examples:
’Ua ’oa’oa ’oia no tona revara’a 7 Tahiti.
He is happy because he is going to Tahiti.
(Lit. he is happy with his going to Tahiti)
72 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
’Ua ma’i hia vau no to’u ’amura’a 7 te i ’a ta’aero.
I am sick because I ate bad fish.
(iii) na roto 7
Example:
’Ua rave au nä roto 7 tö’u here ’iana.
1 did it because I love her.
(Lit. I did it in my loving her)
These three forms may be used one for the other, although the first
form is the most common in conversational Tahitian.
89. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. ’Ua haere rätou no te rave mai 7 te faräoa. 2. ’Ua haere ’o Teri’i
’e täpü 7 te vahie. 3. ’Ua haere vau no te mea ’ua hina’aro vau 7 te
puta. 4. ’Ua f a ’aea ’oia 7 te fare nö te mea ’e üa. 5. ’E mea au na’u
no te mea ’e tiare nehenehe tera. 6. ’Ua reva ätu ’oia no te ori haere.
7. ’Ua ta ’oto noa ’oia no te mea ’ua rohirohi ’oia. 8. ’Ua rave vau 7
te ’ohipa no te orara’a. 9. Te hamani ra ’oia 7 te poti ’ia nehenehe
tana ’e haere ’e tai’a. 10. ’Ua haere ätu ’oia 7 te hora ’ahuru ma piti
no te mea ’e tämä’a ’oia 7 o Teri’i täne.
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. He went to get some fish. 2. He took the hammer to build the
house. 3. He bought some yams to give to his mother. 4. He is
angry because I ate his fish. 5. I am happy because he is coming.
6. I like her because she is beautiful. 7. He still sat down because
he was tired. 8. The leaves fell because the wind was strong. 9. He
went bathing in the sea because it was hot. 10. He will go to town
to see his friend.
Lesson 17
IMPERATIVES
90. The Three Degrees of Imperative
There are three degrees of imperative in Tahitian, each with its own
form, as follows:
(i) a + verb
This is the strongest form, which is in fact an absolute command.
It is formed by preceding any verb stem by the imperative particle a.
Examples:
A tamcx’a! Eat!
or A tämä’a ’oe! Eat (you)!
(The verb may be followed by the subject for the sake of clarity.)
A horo’a Utu tera puta ’iana! Give him that book!
A hi’o na 7 tera välii! Look at that place!
The negative or prohibitive form is:
’eiaha + ’e + verb
Example:
’Eiaha ’e ’amu 7 tele Ufi. Do not eat this yam.
(ii) ’e + verb
This imperative form is not an absolute command, but rather an
imperative of persuasion. Example:
’E haere tciua. Let us (two) go.
’E haere mai ’outou. Come here.
(iii) 7a + verb
This is the exhortative form of the imperative, “let us, let them”, etc.
Examples:
’la täpe’a maita’i ’ona 7 teie tao’a.
May he look after this present.
’Ia täpü ’oia 7 te vahie.
May he cut the wood.
’Eiaha forms the negative, as with the preceding two forms.
Example:
'Eiaha ’oia ’ia pa’imi 7 te pua’a.
May he not seek the pigs.
74 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
91. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. A töpü 7 te vahie. 2. A hi’o na! 3. ’Eiaha ’e ta’i. 4. Ta here
ratou 7 tepoti’i. 5. ’Eiaha ’e au 7 teie vcihi. 6. A parahi. 7. A ti’a.
8. ’Eiaha ’e rave 7 te tipi. 9. ’Eiaha ’epafa’i 7 te ’aute. 10. ’la ho’i
mai ’oe 7 te hora pae.
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. Eat those yams. 2. Do not hit the dog. 3. Give me that book.
4. May they (pi.) be happy! 5. Do not run fast. 6. Go and get
some fish at the market. 7. Grate the coconut. 8. Do not forget to
get the theatre tickets. 9. Let us (dl inc.) go and get the boat this
afternoon. 10. Let us (pi. inc.) prepare for the arrival of the
Governor.
92. Arrival in Tahiti
Vocabulary:
te tahua taura’a manureva the airport
te taiete the society, company
te horo patete the passenger
te vahi fa ’ari ’ira ’a the reception area
te rötere the tourist
a tea distant, far away
’oia ho’i namely
Marite U.S.A.
Farani France
Niu Terani New Zealand
te haere mai nei who approaches
te tauiha’a the baggage, suitcase
te pere’o’o the taxi, car
te hotera the hotel
ani to ask
’e nehenehe anei ta ’oe ’e
rave ’ia’u? can you take me?
te ta’ata-fa’ahoro-pere’o’o the taxi driver
’afa’i to transport
fa ’a ’ite to tell, explain
fa ’ahoro to convey, drive
tei he a? where?
hava 7 to put, deposit
Translate:
7 teie taime te tae nei tatou 7 te tahua taura’a manureva no Tahiti
Fa’a ’a. T te hora hitu e te Ufa te tae mai nei te manureva UTA no te
IMPERATIVES 75
taiete Faräni 7 te taura’a manureva nb Tahiti Fa’a ’a. 7 teie taime te
haere mai nei te mau horo patete no te manureva UTA 7 roto 7 te
vähifa’ari’ira’a nb te mau rötere. Te ’ite nei au ’e raverahi mau rötere
nb te mau fenua ötea mai, ’oia ho’i, nb te fenua Faräni, nb te fenua
Marite mai, nb te fenua Europa mai, e nb te fenua Niu Terani ’ato’a.
Te ’ite nei vau 7 te hb’e ta’ata te haere mai nei e töna mau tauiha’a.
Te hina’aro nei ’oia ’e rave 7 te hb’epere’o ’o nb te haere 7 töna hotera.
Te öni nei teie ta’ata rötere 7 te hb’e ta’ata-fa’ahoro-pere’o’o nb te
’afa’i atu ’iöna 7 te ’oire, te vähi tei reira töna hotera. Te öni nei ’oia
7 teie ta’ata-fa’ahoro-pere’o ’o :
“A f a ’a ’ite mai na ’oe ’ia’u, ’e nehenehe anei tö ’oe ’e rave ’ia’u nb
te f a ’ahoro atu 7 te hotera?”
“E, ’e nehenehe roa, ’e haere töua. Tei hea tb ’oe mau tauiha’a ?”
“Teie, ’e nehenehe tö ’oe ’e rave.”
“’E hava’i vau 7 roto 7 te pere’o ’o, ’e haere töua 7 tb ’oe hotera 7
Pape’ete.”
Lesson 18
THE INTERROGATIVE I
93. Yes?, No?
For questions expecting the answer “yes” or “no”, the interrogative
marker is anei, which immediately follows the verb in affirmative
sentences. The word order is:
verb + interrogative + subject
Examples:
’Ua ’em anei ’ona ’inanahi ra?
Did he swim yesterday?
’Ua hohoni hia anei te ta’ata ’e te ’uri?
Was the man bitten by the dog?
Te ta’oto nei anei ’o Teri’i?
Is Terii sleeping?
’E ta’urua anei to ’ananahi?
Will there be a feast tomorrow?
’E mea ’uo’uo anei ter a manu?
Is that bird white?
It should be noted that anei, although following the verb, is preceded
by adverbs or directionals whenever they occur. Example:
’Ua horo ’oi’oi mai anei ’oe?
Did you run here fast?
With the negative interrogative “did you not?”, the word order is the
same as for any negative sentence, anei following the negative
particle to give the following formula:
negative + anei + subject + verb
Examples:
’A it a anei ’oe 7 ta’iri ’iäna?
Did you not hit him?
’Aita anei te mau feiä tu’e-popo no Rai’ätea 7 tae mai?
Didn’t the footballers from Raiatea arrive?
’E ’ere anei 7 to ’oe mana’o?
Is it not your idea?
THE INTERROGATIVE I 77
94. Interrogative Subject
There are three methods of asking the question “who?” or “what?”
in Tahitian, as follows:
(i) ’o vai + noun or pronoun (who?)
’e aha + noun or pronoun (what?)
Examples:
’O vai ter a ta’ata?
’O vai ’oia?
’O vai ’o* ’oe?
’O vai ma taua feiä ra?
’E aha ter a tumu rä’au?
Who is that man?
Who is he?
Who are you?
Who are those people?
What is that tree?
(ii) ’o vai + noun +
tei'
te
With verbal interrogative sentences, there remains the same interrogative,
’o vai, plus the relative particle tei or te. Te is used with
verbs in the present continuous or future tense, while tei is used
elsewhere. Examples:
’O vai tei ’ite 7 te ’au?
Who knows how to swim?
’O vai tei horo’a ätu 7 te puta nä ’oe?
Who gave you the book?
’O vai te vahine tei tunu 7 te Ufi?
Which woman prepared the yams?
’O vai te ta’ata tei horo’a hia te puta ’e te tavana?
Which person was given the book by the chief?
With present and future tense, te may be replaced by ’e in conversation.
Examples:
’O vai te vahine ’e tunu 7 te Ufi ’ananahi?
Which woman will prepare the yams tomorrow?
’O vai ter a ta’ata ’e au ra?
Who is that person swimming?
(iii) na vai + 7 + verb
This interrogative form translates literally “by whom?”, but serves
the same purpose as ’o vai above. This form, however, is used only
with transitive verbs. Examples:
No. vai 7 rave ta’u peni-päpa’i?f
Who took my ballpoint pen?
* Cf. §11, the third usage of 'o.
t Cf. §47, second footnote.
78 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
Na vai 7 horo’a atu 7 /am? ’ava’ava?
Who gave him his cigarettes?
95. Interrogative Non-Subject
The non-subject interrogatives ask such questions as “whom?”
“which?” “to whom?” “whose?” “by whom?”
(i) ’o vai + possessive adjective (whom?)
tehia + noun (which?)
Examples:
’O vai tä ’oe ’e ’ite ra?
Whom do you see?
’O vai tä ’oe 7 horo’a ätu 7 te put a?
To whom did you give the book?
(It should be observed that the possessive adjective always takes the
tä form, and that ’e indicates present or future tense, while 7 indicates
past tense.)
’O vai tä rätou ’e here?
Whom do they like?
’O vai tä te tavana ’e here?
Whom does the chief like?
Tehia tä ’oe ’e hina’aro?
Which one do you want?
Tehia piripou tä ’oe ’e hina’aro?
Which trousers do you want?
(ii) 7a vai (to whom?)
7 tehia ta’ata (to which person?)
Examples:
’Ua horo’a hia ’ia vai ra te puta?
To whom was the book given?
’Ua horo’a ’oe 7 te puta ’ia vai ra?
To whom did you give the book?
’Ua horo’a ’oe 7 te puta 7 tehia ta’ata?
To which person did you give the book?
(iii) no vai; m vai (whose?)
no tehia ta’ata; riä tehia ta’ata (whose?)
’o to vai; 'o tä vai (whose is?)
Examples:
No vai ter a va’a?
Whose is that canoe?
Nä vai ter a puta?
Whose is that book?
THE INTERROGATIVE I 79
This is the most common form of “whose?” in conversational
Tahitian, the choice of no or nä being determined by the same rules
as for possessive adjectives (cf. §36).
No tehia ta’ata te piripou nei?
Whose are these trousers?
Nä tehia ta’ata te puta nei?
Whose is this book?
(Lit. of which person is this book?)
’Ö to vai te va’a maita’i a ’e?
Whose is the best canoe?
’Ö tä vai te f a ’a ’apu rahi a ’e?
Whose is the biggest plantation?
This last form (’b to vai; ’b tä vai) is used best to translate “who has
the . . rather than “whose is . . and is used only with this
connotation.
(iv) ’e vai (by whom?)
’e tehia ta’ata (by which person?)
Examples:
’Ua rave hia to ’oe tääpo’o ’e vai?
By whom was your hat stolen?
‘Ua horo’a hia ’e tehia ta’ata?
By whom was it given?
These forms are used only with the verb in the passive voice.
(v) 7 b vai (to, at whose place?)
Example:
’Ua haere ’oe 7 b vai mä?
To whose place did you go?
’Ua haere vau 7 b Teri 7 mä.
I went to Terii’s place.
Note that mä follows vai when a plurality is implied or suspected.
(See §13 for the usage of mä.)
95. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. ’E mea ’uo’uo anei tera manu? 2. ’E au anei ’oia ’ananahi?
3. ’Ua ta’iri anei ’ona 7 täna ’uri? 4. ’O vai tera vahine? 5. Nä vai
7 ta’iri 7 tä ’u ’uri? 6. ’O vai tei ta’i 7 roto 7 te piha? 7. ’O vai te
ta’ata ’e tu’u hia 7 roto 7 te fare ’auri? 8. ’O vai te ta’ata tei horo’a
hia te puta ’e te tavana? 9. ’O vai tä ’oe ’e haere ’e h i’o? 10. Tehia
i ‘a tä ’outou 7 rave?
80 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. To whose place will they (pi.) go? 2. Which dog does he want?
3. Whose is that watch? 4. By whom was it taken? 5. Whose is
that car? 6. To whom did they (dl) give the present? 7. Who is that
man? 8. Who hit the dog? 9. Whom did you see in town? 10. Who
took the bread?
97. The Post Office
Vocabulary:
te fare rata the post office riä mua first
te rät ere the tourist horo ’a to give
hapono to send, post te faräne the franc
te rata the letter e yes
te afata tauiha’a the parcel ’ait a no
tomo to enter ahiri well then
’ite to see te tiro the kilogram
äni to ask te tära 5 francs CFP
’e mea nafea? how? te manureva the aeroplane
’e aha te huru? how are things? maururu thank you
’eiaha ’e rü don’t panic ’oa ’oa to be pleased
faito to weigh nb te mea because
hi ’o to observe, see
’e aha tä ’oe ’e haere mai ai? what have you come for?
Translate:
7 teie po’ipo’i ’ua haere te ho’e rät ere 7 te fare rata no te hapono
7 tana rata 7 te fenua Marite e tana ’ato’a afata tauiha’a. 7 teie
taime te tomo nei ’ona 7 roto 7 te fare rata. Te ’ite nei ’oia 7 te hö’e
pbti’i purotu rib te fare rata. 7 teie nei te äni ra ’oia 7 taua p o ti’i
ra ’e mea nafea ’ia hapono 7 tana rata e tana afata tauiha’a.
“Ta ora na ’oe ’e teie p o ti’ipurotu. ’E aha te huru 7 teie p o ’ipo’i?”
“Maita’i roa. ’E aha ta ’oe ’e haere mai nei?”
“Te haere mai nei vau no te hapono 7 tä ’u nau rata ’e piti e tä’u
afata tauiha’a 7 te fenua Marite”
Eiaha ’e rü, ’e faito vau 7 tä ’oe nau rata riä mua. A horo’a mai
tä ’oe nau rata. Nb teie ’e piti nau rata ’e toru ’ahuru ma piti faräne.
’E mea hapono ’ato’a teie afata tä ’oe?”
“E, ’e mea hapono ’ato’a 7 te fenua Marite.”
“Ahiri, a horo’a mai ’e faito vau. ’E piti tiro teie afata tä ’oe, ’e
hb’e hanere tära e maha ’ahuru te moni no teie afata no te haponora’a
riä n i’a 7 te manureva”
“Maururu ’ia ’oe ’e teie pbti’i purotu. Te ’oa’oa nei au nb te mea 7
to ’u haerera’a mai 7 roto 7 teie fare rata, ’ia h i’o vau ’o ’oe äna’e te
p b ti’i purotu roa.”
Lesson 19
THE INTERROGATIVE II
This second lesson on the Tahitian interrogatives deals with the
questions “why?”, “where?”, “when?”, “how?”, “what?”
98. Why?
There are three ways of asking the question “why” ?, as follows:
(i) no te aha . . . ai
Examples:
No te aha ’oe 7 horo’a ä tu ai 7 te put a ’iäna?
Why did you give him the book?
No te aha ’ona 7 maoro ai 7 täna ’ohipa ’inanahi?
Why was he late for work yesterday?
No te aha te fenua 7 haumi ai?
Why is the ground wet?
Note that non-verbal sentences become verbalised when the
question “why?” is asked, and that the directional ai always follows
the verb.
(ii) ’e aha . . . ai
This form is exactly the same as the last, but more colloquial.
Examples:
’E aha ’oe ’e au ai?
Why are you swimming?
’E aha tera ta’ata 7 parahi noa ai?
Why is that man still sitting down?
(iii) ’e aha te tumu . . . ai
This form asks “for what reason?” Example:
’E aha te tumu ratou 7 tae mai ai 7 ’onei?
Why have they come here?
82 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
With the negative interrogative, “why not?”, there is a special
construction, as follows:
interrogative . . . ’ore ai ’e + verb
Examples:
No te aha ’oe ’e ’ore ai ’e au?
Why don’t you swim?
No te aha ’oe ’i ’ore ai 'e turn 7 te mci ’a ?
Why didn’t you prepare the food?
99. Where?
There are several msthods of asking “where?” Each method will be
explained in turn.
(i) tei hea + noun
This is the fixed formula for non-verbal sentences. Examples:
Tei hea te fare toa? Where is the shop?
Tei hea te poti’i? Where is the girl?
(ii) With verbal sentences, past tense, there are two constructions,
although the same question marker is used.
7 hea'
tei hea + 7 te + verb + -ra’a
7 hea ’
tei hea + possessive adjective + verb 4- -ra’a
Examples:
T hea ’ona 7 te ’aura’a ’inanahi?
Where did he swim yesterday?
T hea ’ona 7 te tahunara’a 7 te puta?
Where did he hide the book?
7 hea ibna ’aura’a ’inanahi ra?
Where did he swim yesterday?
7 hea to ’oe vaihora ’a 7 te puta ?
Where did you put the book?
7 hea to te vahine vaihora ’a 7 te puta ?
Wirre did the woman put the book?
It shoili be noted that the to form of the possessive adjective is
used, and that the two constructions above may be used interchangeably.
(iii) With verbal sentences, future and present tense, there is a
different construction:
I" 7 hea'
l ’ei hea + subject + ’e + verb . . . ai
THE INTERROGATIVE II 83
Examples:
’Ei hea ’o ’oe ’e tämä ’a ai 7 teie po ?
Where will you eat tonight?
7 hea ’ona ’e au ai?
Where will he swim?
(iv) Where to?
This question is indicated simply by placing 7 hea after the verb.
Example:
’e haere ’oe 7 hea? Where are you going?
(v) Where from?
This question is usually asked in a non-verbal way. Thus:
Mai hea mai ’oe? Where do you come from?
Or: No hea tera pah'i? Where is that boat from?
100. When?
There are three methods of asking the question “when?” in Tahitian.
afea ]
+ future tense + ai
Any of these three question markers may be used without distinction.
Examples:
Anafea ’oia ’e reva ai? When will he leave?
Afea rätou ’e ta’oto ai? When will they sleep?
Afea ’o ’oe ’e ho’i mai ai? When will you come back?
(i) ahea
1anafeaJ
(Ü)
inafea
7 anafea + past tense + ai
Either of these question markers may be used without distinction.
Example:
7 anafea ’oia 7 reva ätu ai?. When did he leave?
Note that with the past tense, the nominalised form of the verb is
also used, as in:
Inafea to ’oe haerera’a ’e tai’al
When did you go fishing?
In such cases, the to form of the possessive adjective is used, as in §99.
(iii) ’e aha te taime . . . ai
This is a general interrogative and may be used without tense
distinction. Example:
’E aha te taime ’ona 7 ta’iri ai 7 te ’uri?
When did he hit the dog?
84 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
101. How?
There are two methods of asking “how?” in Tahitian, as follows:
T ’ua nafea ]
(i) ’e nafea + subject + 7 te + verb
\_te nafea ra\
The form with ’ua indicates past tense, with ’e the future, and with
te . . . ra the present. Examples:
’IJa nafea rätou ’i te rave?
How did they do it?
’Ua nafea rätou ’i te hamani ’i te fare?
How did they build the house?
’E nafea rätou ’i te rave?
How will they do it?
’E nafea rätou ’i te hamanira’a* 7 te fare?
How will they build the house?
Te nafea ra ’oe 7 te hanianira’a 7 te fare?
How are you building the house?
(Ü)
I" ’e mea nafea
:' ’te nafea +i I
[ te nafea ra
[to + subject + verb +-ra’a
’E mea nafea indicates past tense, while ’e nafea and te nafea ra are
as explained in §101 (i).
The use of to and tä is important. When the to form is used the
nuance of the question is “how did you manage to?”, while the tä
form is more direct, and expects an answer of the type “with an axe,
with a hammer”. Examples:
’E mea nafea tä rätou raver a ä ?
How did they do it?
’E mea nafea tä rätou hamanira’a 7 te fare?
How did they build the house?
’E nafea tä rätou raver a ’a?
How will they do it?
Te nafea ra to ’oe hamanira’a 7 te fare?
How are you building the house?
102. What?
With non-verbal sentences, “what?” is translated by ’e aha plus
noun, pronoun, or demonstrative. Examples:
’Eahafera? What is that?
’E aha ter a tumu rä’au? What is that tree?
The -raä form is often used when the direct object of the verb is stated.
THE INTERROGATIVE II 85
With verbal sentences, the form is ’e aha plus possessive adjective
plus verb. Examples:
’E aha tä ’oe ’e rave ra?
What are you doing there?
’E aha ta ’oe ’e hi ’o ra ?
What are you looking at there?
’E aha ta ’oe 7 ’ite ’inanahi ra?
What did you see yesterday?
’E aha tä ’oe ’e ’ite 'ananahi?
What will you see tomorrow?
There is an idiomatic expression for “what are you doing?’’,
“how will you be fixed?” etc. as follows:
“What with?”, is rendered by 7 te aha? Example:
’Ua ta’iri ’oia 7 te aha? What did he hit it with?
“By what?” is translated by ’e te aha? Example:
’Ua patia hia ’oe ’e te aha? By what were you pricked?
103. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. No te aha ratou ’e ’au ai? 2. No te aha ’ona 7 ta’iri ai 7 te ’uri?
3. No te aha te ’uri 7 taparahi hia ai? 4. Tei hea tona vaihora’a 7
te puta? 5. ’E haere te vahine 7 hea? 6. ’E haere ’o ’oe ihea 7 teie
nei? 7. ’E aha tä tatou ’ohipa 7 teie po? 8. Inafea ’oia 7 horo’a ätu
ai 7 te puta? 9. ’E mea nafea tä rätou hamanira’a 7 te va’a? 10. ’E
aha tä ’outou ’e ’amu ra?
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. Why did they take it? 2. Why did you come? 3. Where is the
post office? 4. Where did you go yesterday? 5. When did the
woman sleep? 6. Where are you from? 7. What is your name?
8. How did they kill the shark? 9. What did you give them?
10. Where is your hat?
104. Conversation
Vocabulary:
7 hea? where?
ho’o mai to buy
noa only, always
Te aha na ’oe?
7 aha na ’oe ?
What are you doing?
How were you?
How will you be fixed?
What’s the matter with you?
What’s the matter with him?
’E aha ’oe ’ananahi?
Also: ’E aha to 'oe ?
’E aha tona?
86 conver: ational tahitian
te f e ’i the red bananas
te ’umara the sweet potato
te hfi the yam
ri 7 a little
afea ? when?
’e riro paha perhaps
te maorora’a the duration, length
’aore ra or
no te mea because
te hoa the friend
papa 7 to write
mai te mea if, whether
hina ’aro to want
fa ’afa ’aea to remain, stay
’e nehenehe roa tä mäua we can
f a ’aoti to conclude, end
paraparau to talk, chat
tia 7 to wait
te vahine-fa’aipoipo the wife
tunu to prepare
te mä’a the food
7 /e/e mahäna now, today
Translate:
“ 7 he a ’oe 7 /e/e mahana?”
“’Ua haere au 7 te matete ’e ho’o mai 7 te i ’a. ’Ua tae vau 7 te
matete, ’aita ’e i ’a. 'Ua rave noa mai vau 7 te m a u fe ’i, te ’umura, te
ufi. E ’o ’oe, 7 he a ’oe 7 /e/e mahana?”
“’Ua haere vau ’e ’au no te mea ’aita ta’u ’e ’ohipa 7 /e/e mahana.
’Ua mana’o vau ’e haere ’e ’äu ri 7. Afea ’outou ’e haere ai 7 Ra’iatea?”
“Te mana’o nei vau ’e riro paha 7 /e/e hepetoma 7 mua nei. ’Ei
reira matou ’e haere atu ai 7 Ra’iatea. Te maorora’a ’e riro paha ’e
piti ’aore ra ’e toru ’ava’e. E ’outou? ’E haere ’outou 7 he a 7 /e/e
mau mahana 7 mua nei?”
“Te mana’o nei mäua ’e haere ätu 7 te mau motu Matuita ma, no
te mea te vai ra te tahi mau hoa tö mäua ’o tei päpa’i mai, mai te mea
’e hina’aro mäua 7 te haere ’e f a ’afa’aea te tahi mau mahana 7
Matuita. ’E nehenehe roa tä mäua ’e reva ätu 7 te fenua Matuita.”
“ 7 /e/e taime te mana’o nei vau ’ua tae 7 te hora no te haerera’a
’e ’äu. No reira, te hina’aro nei vau ’e fa ’aoti 7 tä täuaparaparaura’a.
Te mana’o ’ato’a nei vau e, te tia’i noa mai ra tä ’oe vahine f a ’aipoipo
7 te fare no te tunu 7 te mä’a. ’E tämä’a maita’i ia ’orua 7 /e/e
mahäna.”
Lesson 20
DEPENDENT SENTENCES I
105. Dependent Subject
The first type of dependent sentence to be explained is what is often
called “the relative clause or sentence”, of the type “I saw the man
who took the book” .
There are several constructions in Tahitian, dependent on tense,
and on whether the verb in the dependent clause describes an action
or a state.
(i) With sentences beginning with “it is they who . . .”, “ it is you
who . . .” , etc., the relative pronouns are tei (past tense) and te
(future tense and present continuous). Examples:
’O vau te taora 7 te ’ofa’i.
It is I who will throw stones.
’O vau tei taora 7 te ’ofa’i ’inanahi ra.
It is I who threw stones yesterday.
’O vau te parau nei.
It is I who am speaking.
(ii) With sentences beginning with “I saw the man who . . .”,
“I saw the dog that . . .”, in other words, when the main clause
contains a verb in Tahitian, the construction used depends on the
tense of the dependent clause.
When the verb of the dependent clause is in the present or past
continuous, the forms are:
’e + verb -f nei (present)
’e + verb + ra (past)
In this case, nei indicates proximity to the speaker, while ra indicates
that the action takes place further away. Examples:
Te ’ite ra vau 7 hd’e vahine ’e ’aü ra.
I saw a woman who was swimming.
A hi ’o na ’oe 7 te mau manu ’e ma ’ue nei.
Look at the birds which are flying.
88 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
When the verb of the dependent clause is in the past tense, there
are two possibilities. If a completed action is described, then ’o tei
is the relative pronoun used. Example:
’E a ’o ’oe 7 te tamaiti ’o tei taora mai 7 te ’ofa’i.
You will correct the boy who threw the stone.
If the action described in the dependent clause is a state, rather than
an action, such as “I saw the boy throwing a stone” as opposed to
“I saw the boy who threw the stone”, then the following construction
is used:
. . . 7 te + verb + ra’a
Examples:
’Ua ’ite au 7 te ho’e ta’ata 7 te täpüra’a 7 te vahie.
I saw the man cutting the wood.
’Ua ’ite au 7 te ho’e ta’ata 7 te horo’ara’a 7 te ma’a na te ’uri.
I saw a man giving food to the dog.
Te fa ’aro’o nei au 7 te ’aiu 7 te ta’ira’a.
I hear the baby crying.
When the verb of the dependent clause is in the future tense, the
relative pronoun ’o te is used. Examples:
Te ta’ata ’o te ’ia ’e fa ’ahapa hia ’oia ’e te lure.
The person who steals will be punished by the law.
’O vai ’o teparaparau no te ha’amaurUrura’a 7 te mau manihini?
Who will speak to thank the guests?
(iii) When the verb of the dependent clause is in the passive voice,
there are two possibilities, tei or 7, for the past, and also two, te or
’e, for the future tense or present continuous. Examples:
’Ua inu vau 7 te rä’au tei horo’a hia na tepoti’i.
I drank the medicine that was given to the girl.
’Ua ’ite vau 7 te tao’a te horo’a hia nä te tavana.
I have seen the present that will be given to the chief.
It should be noted that ’o tei, ’o te may be replaced by tei, te without
distinction.
106. Dependent Non-subject
This type of dependent clause is the one in which the subject is not
the actor, as was the case in §105. It is found in sentences of the
type “the man whom we . . . .” The relative pronoun, in this case,
is replaced by the possessive adjective tä or ’o ta plus noun or
pronoun. To the verb is added 7 for past tense, ’e for present or
future. Examples:
’E inu vau 7 te pia tci’u ’e au maita’i.
I shall drink the beer that I like.
DEPENDENT SENTENCES I 89
’Ua ’ite au 7 te tao’a tä rätou 7 horo’a ätu nä te tavana.
I saw the gift they gave to the chief.
'Ua ’ite au 7 te tao’a tä te vahine 7 horo’a ätu 7 te tavana.
I saw the gift that the woman gave to the chief.
It should be noted that the English “to whom was given”, etc., is
translated in Tahitian by “who was given”, similar in structure to
the dependent clauses of §105(iii). Example:
'Ua ’ite au 7 te ari 7 ’o tei horo 'a hia te maro ’ura.
I saw the king to whom the red belt was given.
(Lit. I saw the king who was given the red belt)
As was stated above, the student of Tahitian must consider Tahitian
in its own terms if he is to think in Tahitian and not simply translate
literally from his own mother tongue.
’ ’e tei
nä tei by whom, which
This form is used mainly when the verb of the main clause is in the
passive voice. Either ’e or nä may be used to indicate the agent.
Example:
’Ua täpe’a hia ’oia nä tei tapapa mai ’iäna.
He was stopped by the person who pursued him.
107. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. ’O ’outou tei ta’iri ’ia’u ’inanahi ra. 2. ’Ua ’ite au 7 te ho’e ta ’ata
7 te hamanira’a 7 te fare. 3. ’E ho’o mai vau 7 te ’uri ’o te horo’a hia
nä rätou. 4. Tera te fare tä ’u ’e hina’aro. 5. Tera te ’uri tä rätou 7
ho’o mai. 6. ’Ua ’ite au 7 te tämuta tei hamani 7 tera fare. 7. ’Ua
haere vau ’e rave mai 7 te pua ’a ’o te tupa 7 hia no te fa ’aipoipora ’a.
8. ’Ua ’ite au 7 te ta’ata ’o te p a ’imi hia ra ’e te mau muto’i. 9. ’Ua
’ite hia ’e au te moni tä ’oe 7 mo’e. 10. ’E mea äu roa nä’u tepere’o ’o
täna 7 ho’o mai.
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. It is you (pi.) who will build the boat. 2. I saw the man who hit
your dog. 3. This is the girl who planted the flowers. 4. That is the
girl whom we (pi. inc.) saw. 5. This is the letter that the chief wrote.
6. The person who wrote this book has left. 7. I met the girl who
was married yesterday. 8. I saw Moana planting a coconut tree.
9. I went and watched my wife swimming. 10. It is they (dl) who
went fishing for crayfish.
90 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
108. Visit to the Shops
Vocabulary:
fa ’a ’ite to explain
te haerera’a the visit
te fare toa the shop
ho ’o-haere to shop
te tauiha’a the purchase
hina’aro to want
tomo to enter
äni to ask
te tamähine-ho ’oho ’o the shop assistant
horo ’a to give
te piripou the trousers
ninamu blue
’ehia moni? how much?
te tära 5 francs CFP
tehia ? which one?
’aufau to pay
te ’ahu ’o’omo the shirt
’eiaha ’e rii! don’t rush!
ti 7 to get, collect
rave to take
pu’ohu to wrap up
te fa ’ari’i the paper bag
mauniru to thank
ha ’amaramarama to explain
te moni-ho’o the price
Translate:
7 teie nei, teie te tahi mau parau fa ’a’itera’a no te haere 7 roto 7 te
fare toa. 7 teie taime te haere nei tätou 7 roto 7 te hö’e fare toa no
te ho’o-haere 7 te mau tauiha’a tä tätou ’e hina’aro.
7 teie taime te tomo nei ia vau 7 roto 7 te fare toa, e te äni nei vau
7 teie tamähine-ho’oho’o 7 roto 7 te fare toa:
“Te hina’aro nei vau 7 te hö’e piripou maita’i no’u."
Te äni nei vau ’iäna, ’e horo’a mai tera piripou ninamu. Te horo’a
mai nei ’ona 7 teie taime.
" ’Ehia moni 7 tera piripou ?"
“ 7s piti hanere tära e pae hanere. Tehia tä ’oe ’e hina’aro?"
“ 7s hina’aro vau 7 tera mea ninamu. ’Ehia moni?"
“ 7s hanere tära."
11A horo’a mai tera mea ninamu."
’Ua horo’a mai ’ona, e ’ua rave vau. ’Ua ’aufau vau 7 te moni ’e
piti hanere tära.
DEPENDENT SENTENCES I 91
“Tera tä ’oe moni. ’E horo’a ’ato’a mai ’oe 7 tera ’ahu haviti 7 ’o
7 tera vähi ta’u ’e ’ite nei. A horo’a mai nay
Eiaha ’e rü, ’e haere vau ’e t i ’i. Tera tä ’oe ’ahu. ’E hina’aro?”
’e hina’aro ihoa vau 7 tera ’ahu. Fa’a ’ite mai ’oe ’ia’u ’ehia
moni.”
“Teie te moni ’o tera ’ahu. Hb’e hünere tära e toru ’ahuru.”
“ ’£ ’ere 7 te mea moni roa. ’E rave vau. A p u ’ohu mai ’oe 7 te
piripou e te ’ahu 7 roto 7 te tahi f a ’ari’i. E, tera mai te moni no te
’ahu e te piripou.
“Te haere nei vau e maurüru roa ’ia ’oe, 7 te horo’ara’a mai 7 te
mau parau ha ’amaramarama no ni ’a 7 te mau moni-ho ’o no te ’ahu e
te mau piripou no te fare toa nei.”
Lesson 21
DEPENDENT SENTENCES II
This type of dependent clause follows, for example, “I know”,
where the dependent clause is of the type “why he broke the window” ,
“when he is coming”.*
109. Why
“Why”, introducing a dependent clause, is rendered by no te aha in
Tahitian. Examples:
’Ua ’ite au no te aha ’oia 7 haere ai ’e ’au.
I know why he went swimming.
’Ua ’ite au no te aha ’oia 7 hohoni hia ’e te ma’o.
I know why he was bitten by the shark.
110. When
When the dependent clause precedes the main clause, “when” is
’ia in Tahitian. Examples:
’la oti tä rcitou pafa’ira’a ’anani, ’e pou mai rcitou.
When their orange harvest is finished, they descend.
’Ia mam te mata’i, ’e haere ai taua ’e tai’a.
When the wind has dropped, we will go fishing.
’Ia te tavana 7 reva ätu, te paraparau noa ra ia te mau ta’ata.
When the chief left, people were still talking.
’lana 7 reva ätu, te ta’oto noa ra ’oe.
When he left, you were still asleep.
’Ia ’u 7 parau, te parau ’ato ’a ra ’oia.
When I spoke, he was talking also.
Note that with this construction the object form of the pronoun is
used to indicate the subject.
When the dependent clause is of the type which usually follows
the main clause, there are two possible constructions:
* In strict linguistic terms, some of the clauses dealt with in this lesson would
be considered to be types of complements, but, as they have similar structure
patterns to the strict dependent clauses, (for pedagogical reasons) they are considered
as such and will be all treated in this one lesson.
DEPENDENT SENTENCES II 93
(i)
7 te mahana
’e aha te taime + subject + verb
Examples:
’Aita roa vau 7 ’ite 7 te mahana ’oia ’e tae mai ai.
I do not know when he will arrive.
’Aita vau 7 ’ite ’e aha te taime ’oia 'e ho’i mai ai.
I do not know when he will return.
(ii) 7 te mahana + no + verb + ra’a
Example:
’Aita vau 7 ’ite 7 te mahana nö ibna taera’a mai.
I do not know when he will return.
111. While, When
“While” is translated in Tahitian by the particle ’a in the place of the
ordinary tense markers. Examples:
7 teie taime ’a parauparau ai vau nä roto 7 te r e o ’d Radio Tahiti,
te ’ite nei vau 7 te ho’e ta’ata.
At this moment while I speak on Radio Tahiti, I see a man.
7 te ’ava’e ’a pohe ai ’oia
in the month when he died
When two actions are performed simultaneously, ma te + verb is
generally used to denote “at the same time as”. Examples:
’Ua ori haere ’oia ma te inu 7 te pape.
He walked along drinking water.
Te ori haere ra ’oia ma te hi ’o 7 muri.
He was walking along looking behind him.
When the second verb is thought of as a verb of motion, the
formula mai te + verb + mai is used. Examples:
’E pou mai rätou 7 raro mai te ämo mai 7 te ’anani.
They descend bearing the oranges.
Te haere pauroa te mau hui ra’atira mai te tamau mai 7 te hei 7
n i’a 7 te upo’o.
The people come wearing crowns of flowers on their heads.
112. How
“How” is rendered in Tahitian by:
(i) Past: ’e mea nafea + possessive adjective + verb + ra’a
(ii) Future: ’e nafea + subject + 7 te + verb
94 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
Examples:
’Ua ’ite au ’e mea nafea töna f a ’afanaura’a 7 tä ’u vahine.
I know how he prepared for my wife’s confinement.
’Aita van 7 ’ite ’e nafea ’ona 7 te hamani 7 tona fare.
I do not know how he will build his house.
113. What
’Eaha + possessive adjective + verb translates “what” in dependent
clauses such as:
’Aita vau 7 'ite ’e aha tana ’e rave nei.
I do not know what he is doing.
’Aita vau 7 ’ite ’e aha tana ’ohipa ’inanahi ra.
I do not know what he was doing yesterday.
114. Whether
“Whether” is indicated in Tahitian by anei following the verb of the
dependent clause. Examples:
’Aita vau 7 ’ite ’e hohoni hia anei ’oia ’e te ma’o.
I do not know if he will be bitten by a shark.
’A it a vau 7 ’ite ’e haere mai anei ’oia ’ananahi.
I do not know if he will come tomorrow.
115. That
E (that), at the end of the main clause, introduces the dependent
clause after verbs of knowing. Examples:
’Ua ’ite au e ’ua reva a tu ’oia ’inanahi ra.
I know that he left yesterday.
’Ua ’ite au e ’e ma’i to tera ta’ata.
I know that that man is sick.
With verbs of saying, however, the e is frequently omitted. Example:
’Ua parau vau ’e haere mai te tavana.
I said that the chief will come.
116. Since
There are two constructions which translate “since”. They are as
follows:
(i) mai te mahäna + subject + ’a . . .
This construction is used when the subject precedes the verb in the
dependent clause. Example:
Mai te mahäna vau ’a tae mai ai 7 Tahiti, ’aita te fare 7 taui.
Since I have arrived back in Tahiti, the house has not changed.
DEPENDENT SENTENCES II 95
(ii) mai te mahana 7 + verb + subject
This is used when the subject follows the verb in the dependent
clause. Example:
mai te mahana 7 reva ätu ai ’oe . . .
since you left . . .
The choice of construction rests with the individual.
117. Where
There are two non-interrogative forms for “where”.
(i) where there is/are . . .
This is translated in Tahitian by tei reira followed by a noun.
Examples:
te fa a tei reira te ’anani
the valley where the oranges are
te vähi tei reira te hotera
the place where the hotel is
(ii) where + verb
In Tahitian there are two possible constructions to express “where”
in a dependent clause; either verb + subject + 7 hea, or 7 te
vähi + possessive adjective. Examples:
’A it a vau 7 ’ite 'ua haere ’oia 7 hea.
I do not know where he went.
’Aita vau 7 ’ite ’e haere ra ’oia 7 hea.
I do not know where he is going.
Or: ’Aita vau 7 ’ite 7 te vähi täna 7 haere.
I do not know where he went.
’Ua ’ite vau 7 te vähi täna ’e haere ra.
I know where he is going.
But: ’A it a vau 7 ’ite 7 te vähi ’e haere ai ’oia.
I do not know where he will go.
With future tense, the normal verbal construction plus ai is reverted
to.
118. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. ’Aita vau 7 ’ite 7 te mahäna rätou 7 tae mai ai. 2. ’Ua au ’outou
ma te inu 7 te pia. 3. ’Aita rätou 7 ’ite no te aha ’oia 7 ta’i ai.
4. ’Ua ’ite au no te aha ’oia 7 mä’iti hia ai ’ei tavana. 5. Te parau ra
te ta’ata ra, ’e ta’ata maita’i ’o ‘oe. 6. ’Aita tätou 7 'ite ’e aha te
taime ’oia ’e ho’i mai ai. 7. 'Aita vau 7 ’ite ’e mea nafea 7 roa’a ai
täna pua’a. 8. ’Aita ’oia 7 'ite ’e haere mai anei rätou. 9. ’Emana’o
vau e ’e ’ite ’oe 7 tä ’u rata. 10. ’Ua mana’o vau e ’ua reva ätu ’oe.
96 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. I know when he left. 2. He walked along eating an orange.
3. I do not know why he broke the glass. 4. I know when he built
the house. 5. They (pi.) do not know why he left. 6. They know
what I did yesterday. 7. I see that you have written to me. 8. He
said that you are bad. 9. I think that he is strong. 10. I know how
the girl broke the window-pane.
119. Copra
Vocabulary:
te puha the copra
hamani to make
ha ’aputu to heap up
te ha’ari the coconut
marö dry
täpüpü to cut in two
te ’opa’a the ripe coconut
te to’i the axe
piharahara to open up
pana to dig around, to scoop
tatara to remove, detach
te ma’a the food, the white of the coconut,
taura7
the meat
to dry in the sun
te maorora’a the period, time
mai te peu e if
’o ’omo to put in a bag
te püte the sack, bag
hopoi to send, transport
ho’o to sell
Translate:
Teparau no tepuha. No te hamani 7 tepuha ’e ha’aputu hia te mau
ha’ari maro ’ato’a. ’Ia oti, ’e tcipupU hia te mau ’opa’a, ’oia ho’i te
mau ha’ari marö ’ato’a. ’E tapu hia 7 te to’i. ’Imuri iho, ’epiharahara
hia te mau ’opa’a tei täpTipü hia e, ’e pana pauroa hia te mau ha’ari
no te tatara mai 7 te ma’a. ’Ia oti te reira, ’e taura’i hia te mau ma’a
’o te ha’ari, ’oia ho’i te puha, 7 n i’a 7 te mahäna 7 te maorora’a ’e
piti ’aore ra ’e toru hepetoma te maorora’a, mai te peu e ’e mea
maita’i te mahäna. ’Ia maro maita’i te puha, ’e ’o ’omo hia 7 roto 7
te mau pute no te hopoi ätu ’e ho’o.
Lesson 22
SPECIAL VERBAL FORMS
120. Reflexive
In Tahitian, the reflexive may be expressed in the following way:
verb + subject + object pronoun
With this construction, the reflexive pronoun follows the subject.
Examples:
’Ua ha’apohe ’oia ’iäna.
He killed himself.
(Lit. was kill he him)
’Ua horohoröi vau ’ia’u 7 teie po’ipo’i.
I washed myself this morning.
Some verbs in Tahitian are reflexive in sense, and do not require
the object pronoun. Examples:
’Ua mutu ’o Teri’i 7 tera tipi.
Terii cut himself with that knife.
’Ua mutu vau 7 te tipi.
I cut myself with a knife.
’Ua hi’ohi’o vau 7 roto 7 te hi’o.
I looked at myself in the mirror.
121. Reciprocal
The reciprocal involves the repetition of the pronoun, followed by
iho. The sentence word order remains the same. Examples:
A moto ’outou ’outou iho!
Fight one another!
’E hina’aro vau ’ia tauturu rätou rätou iho.
I want them to help one another.
’E hina’aro vau 'ia tauturu tera mau ta’ata ’ia rätou rätou iho.
I want these people to help one another.
122. Emphatic Pronoun
The emphatic pronoun consists of the ordinary subject pronoun +
iho (cf. §42). Example:
Nä’u iho 7 rave.
I did it myself.
98 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
123. Ability/Inability
This form translates “can”, “able to”. There are two main constructions:
(i) ’e nehenehe ta +
noun
pronoun ’e + verb
(Lit. it is good my/your, etc. action)
Examples:
‘E nehenehe tä ’u ’e pa ’uma 7 ni ’a 7 fera tumu ra ’au.
I can climb that tree.
’E nehenehe anei tä ’oe ’e ämo mat 7 fera pute?
Can you carry that bag?
’E nehenehe tä ter a ta ’at a ’e pa ’uma 7 ni ’a 7 ter a tumu rä ’au.
The man can climb that tree.
’Ananahi ’e nehenehe tä ’u ’e haere ’e ’äu.
Tomorrow I can go swimming.
(ii) ’e nehenehe
’ia + pronoun
7 te + noun + ’ia + verb
This construction is more formal than the first, and not as widely
used in conversation. Examples:
’E nehenehe ’iäna ’ia horo.
He can run.
’E nehenehe 7 ter a ta ’ata ’ia rave mai 7 tä ’oe tauiha ’a.
That person can bring your things.
(iii) ’e ti ’a (plus same construction as in ii)
This construction is very formal and not much used in conversation.
Example:
’E ti ’a anei ’ia ’u ’ia rave 7 teie ope ?
Can I take this shovel?
(iv) When inability is expressed, the construction changes to:
’e nehenehe ’e + verb
’e ’ita
’ait a ■I- ta
noun
pronoun J
Example:
’E ’ita tä’u 'e nehenehe ’e pa ’uma 7 n i’a 7 tera tumu rä’au.
I cannot climb that tree.
SPECIAL VERBAL FORMS 99
124. Competence/Incompetence
This construction corresponds to the English “to know how to”,
“ not to know how to”, as follows:
’ua
’e ’ite . .. + 7 te + verb
Examples:
’Ua ’ite anei ’oe 7 te tunu 7 te üß?
Do you know how to prepare yams?
’E, ’ua ’ite au 7 te tunu 7 te Ufi.
Yes, I know how to prepare yams.
125. Attempted Action
This form corresponds to “try, attempt to” . The construction is as
follows:
tämata (try) . . . 7 te + verb
Examples:
’E tämata vau 7 te hamani 7 te fare.
I shall try to build a house.
Tnanahi ra ’ua tämata vau 7 te hamani 7 te ho’e afata.
Yesterday I tried to make a box.
126. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. Te h i’ohi’o nei täua taua iho. 2. Te ’ite nei ’oia ’iäna 7 roto 7 te
pape. 3. Nä rät on iho 7 ho’o mai 7 te faräoa. 4. Nona iho 7 ta’iri 7 te
’uri ’ä Peu. 5. ’Ananahi ’e tämata vau 7 te haere ’e ta i’a. 6. ’Ua
’ite anei ’oe 7 te tunu 7 te Ufi? 7. ’Ua ’ite rätou 7 te hamani 7 te
fare. 8. ’E nehenehe tä ’u ’e hamani 7 te fare. 9. ’E nehenehe anei
’oe ’e rave 7 te ’ofa’i? 10. ’E'ita tä ’u ’e nehenehe ’e rave 7 te ’ofa’i.
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. They (pi.) are looking at one another. 2. Yesterday they (dl)
washed each other. 3. That man hit Terii’s dog. 4. He will try to
make a box. 5. I can lift the stone. 6. He cannot lift the stone.
7. Do you know how to build a house? 8. Can you (pi.) plant the
yams? 9. Yes, we (pi. exc.) can certainly plant the yams. 10. We
(pi. exc.) cannot plant the yams.
H
’ua
’e
100 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
127. The Market
Vocabulary:
te mätete
7
te m ä ’a
rau
te hum
fa ’anaho
matara
’e tae ätu
raverahi
te mat a ’eina ’a
ho’o
the market
full, to fill
the produce
to be numerous
the kind, sort
to organise, place
to be open
until
many
the district
to sell
te rätere
mäta’ita ’i
te rahira ’a
riro
te ti ’i
te taupo’o
te ’ete
te tauiha’a
te hei-püpü
te ’oa’oara’a deli
te maunirura’a the joy
the product
the shell necklace
the statue
the hat
the basket
the tourist
to look at, admire
the quantity
to become
the delight
Translate:
Te matete no Tahiti, ’e 7 noa ’oia 7 te m ä ’a. ’Ua rau te huru 7 te
mau mahäna ’ato ’a. Mai teie te huru te mau f a ’anahora’a: ’e matara
noa te matete no Pape’ete mai te monire ’e tae ätu 7 te tapati, mai te
hora maha 7 te p o ’ipo’i ’e tae ätu 7 te hora hitu 7 tepb. 7 te tapati ’e
matara ’oia mai te hora maha 7 te p o ’ipo’i ’e tae ätu 7 te hora ’ahuru.
’E raverahi te mau m ä ’a ’e tae mai no te mau mata’eina’a no Tahiti.
’E tae ’a to ’a mai tö te mau motu, no M o ’orea, Huahine, Ra’iätea,
Borabora. Te mahäna rahi ä ’e te mä ’a, 7 te mäitete, mai te mahäna
maha ia ’e tae ätu 7 te tapati. Mai te monire ’e tae ätu 7 te mahäna
torn, ’aita ’e rahi te m ä ’a ’e tae mai 7 te mätete no Pape'ete. ’E raverahi
mau m ä ’a ’e ho’o hia e te tahi mau tauiha’a no te fenua. ’E raverahi
te huru ’b te mau i ’a. ’E ho’o ’ato’a hia te mau hei-püpü, te mau t i ’i,
te mau täüpo’o, te mau ’ete.
’E raverahi mau rätere ’e haere 7 te mätete no Pape’ete no te
mäta’ita ’i te mau rahira’a m ä ’a e te i ’a; ’ua rau te huru ’o te mau
tauiha’a no te fenua. Nb reira, ’ua riro ia te mätete no Pape’ete ’ei
’oa’oara’a, ’ei maurürura’a na te mau rätere.
Lesson 23
DESIDERATIVE,
NECESSITATIVE,
CONDITIONAL
128. Desiderative
The desiderative is expressed in the following ways:
(i)
te
’e
’ua
hina’aro + subject + ’e + verb
This is the construction used when the subject is the same for both
verbs. Examples:
Te hina’aro nei au ’e ho’o mai 7 te heipüpü*
I want to buy a shell necklace.
’E hina’aro vau ’e tunu 7 te Ufi.
I want to prepare the yams.
(ii)
te
’e
’ua
hina’aro + subject + V
7a
+ verb + subject
This construction is used when the subject of the two verbs is different.
Examples:
Te hina’aro nei au ’e tauturu mai ’oe ’ia’u.
I want you to help me.
Te hina’aro nei ’oia ’ia hamani vau 7 te fare.
He wants me to build a house.
(iii) negative + subject + verb +
7 te + verb (past)
’e + verb (present)
In the negative, when the subject of both verbs is the same, the
pattern changes to the above. Examples:
’A it a vau 7 hina’aro 7 te haere.
I did not want to go.
* Hina’aro is also used with a noun object, such as:
’E hina’aro vau 7 tera hei-pupu.
I would like that shell necklace.
102 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
’Aita vau 7 hina’aro 7 te huere ’e ta'i’a.
I did not want to go fishing.
’E ’ita vau ’e hina’aro ’e haere ’e tax a.
I do not want to go fishing.
Otherwise, the normal negative sentence pattern is followed.
Example:
’E ’ita vau ’e hina’aro ’ia ha’aparari ’oe 7 ta’u hapaina.
I do not want you to break my glass.
(iv) A less direct desiderative is formed by ’e ti’a, which corresponds
approximately to “would you like to”, “would they like”,
etc. Example:
’E ti’a anei ’ia ’oe ’ia himene?
Would you like to sing?
This construction is formal, and in conversation one would prefer:
’E nehenehe anei ta ’oe ’e himene?
Would you like to sing?
129. Necessitative
In Tahitian there are several degrees of compulsion expressed by the
different forms of the necessitative.
This is the most common necessitative in conversational Tahitian.
With present tense, ’e or ’ia may precede the verb, while ’ua indicates
past tense. The verb stem is followed by ihoa or ho7. Ihoa
is stronger than ho’i. It should be observed that the ought/must
distinction of English has no exact equivalent in Tahitian. Ihoa
suggests “must”, while ho’i would approximate to the English
“ought” .* Examples:
E haere ihoa vau ’e rave mai 7 te faraoa.
I must go and get some bread.
’Ia tae ihoa täua 7 te tahua taura’a manureva 7 te hora piti.
We two must be at the airport at two o’clock.
’Ua haere ihoa vau ’e rave mai 7 te faraoa.
I had to go and get some bread (and did so).
’E haere ho’i vau 7 te fare toa.
I must/ought to go to the shop.
* Real compulsion is rendered rather by the imperative in Tahitian. Ihoa
simply means “indeed”, and ho’i, “besides, so”.
DESIDERATIVE, NECESSITATIVE, CONDITIONAL 103
The prohibitive form is the same as the negative imperative. Thus:
’Eiaha ihoa ’oe ’e täpü 7 te vahie.
You must not cut the wood.
(ii) ’e mea + verb +
ihoa
ho 7 + subject
This is a necessitative form indicating that one should have done
something, but did not. Example:
’E mea haere ihoa vau ’e rave mai 7 te faraoa.
I should have gone and got some bread.
(iii) 7a + verb + mau + subject . . . ’e ti’a ai
This is the strongest necessitative apart from the imperative. It is
generally restricted to the present tense, however. Examples:
’la ’amu mau vau ’e ti ’a ai.
I really must eat.
Negative: ’Eiaha roa vau ’e ’amu.
I really must not eat.
(iv) ’e mea maita’i + ’ia + verb
This is a weaker necessitative, approximating to the English “it is
recommended” . Example:
’E mea maita’i ’ia ’amu vau.
It would be well if I ate.
(v) ’e mea faufa’a + ’ia + verb
This translates “to need to”, but with overtones of profit or gain.
When this idea is absent, the normal necessitative is used. Examples:
’E mea faufa ’a ’ia ’u ’ia haere ’e ti 7 7 te moni.
I need to go and get some money.
’E ’ere 7 te mea faufa ’a ’ia ’u ’ia haere ’e ti 7 7' te moni.
I do not need to go and get some money.
When the object of “to need” is a noun, the desiderative hina’aro
is used, as explained in §128.
130. Conditional
With real condition, the introducers of the conditional clause are:
(i) mai te peu e
(ii) mai te mea e
104 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
Examples:
’E ta ’iri vau ’ia ’oe, mai te peu e ’e ha ’aparari ’oe 7 tera hapaina.
I shall hit you if you break that glass.
Mai te mea e ’e haere mai ’oe ’ananahi, ’e horo’a ätu vau 7 te
tao’a nä ’oe.
If you come tomorrow I shall give you a present.
Both of the condition introducers may be used interchangeably with
no distinction in meaning.
With unreal condition, that is, in sentences where the action
expressed by the conditional verb does not actually take place, the
introducer changes to ahiri. Example:
Ahiri vau 7 hainani 7 te ’ana, ’e ’ore ia tä ’u mau mä’a tanu ’e
’amu hia ’e te pua’atoro.
If I had built a fence, my vegetables would not have been eaten
by the cattle.
Note: ahiri or ahiri e, may also be used instead of condition introducers
in translating real condition, but not often in conversational
Tahitian.
The English “would have . . . if” is rendered in Tahitian by
’e mea + verb, followed by ahiri. Example:
’E mea täpü vau 7 te vahie, ahiri ’oe ’e horo’a mai 7 te moni
maita’i na’u.
I would have cut the wood if you had paid me well.
131. Exercise
(a) Translate into English:
1. ’E ’ita vau ’e hina’aro ’ia ha’aparari ‘oe i tä ’u hapaina. 2. Te
hina’aro nei te ta’ata ’ia tauturu ’oe ’iana. 3. ’E hina’aro rätou ’e
hamani 7 te fare. 4. ’Aita tätou ’e hina’aro ’e ’äu. 5. ’E haere ihoa
vau ’e t i ’i 7 te moni. 6. ’Eiaha roa ’oe ’e ta ’iri noa atu 7 tera ’uri.
7. Ta haere mai ihoa ’oe ’e tämä ’a. 8. ’E hina ’aro vau 7 tepeni-päpa 7.
9. ’E mea haere hoT au ’e ti'i 7 te moni. 10. Mai te peu e ’e maita’i
te mahäna ’ananahi, ’e haere täua 7 te pae miti.
(b) Translate into Tahitian:
1. I must go now. 2. I do not want to go to town. 3. He wants an
orange. 4. I must go to the shop. 5. You must not go swimming
today. 6. The girls must go and get the bread. 7. They (pi.) want
to buy a boat. 8. They two want me to build a boat. 9. You must
not break that glass. 10. If that dog eats my fowls, I shall kill him.
132. Fishing
Vocabulary:
f a ’a ’ite to explain
DESIDERATIVE, NECESSITATIVE, CONDITIONAL 105
te huru the way, method
te ’ohipa the work
te ravaai the fishing
te ’upe’a the net
te pae ä ’au the edge of the reef
tu u to deposit, put in, put down
tiahi to chase
7 roto into
fa ’a ’ati to close (a net), accompany
pou to descend
7 muri iho after that, next
te miti the sea
taui to change
te vähi the place, area
te tax ’ara ’a the fishing
te pae moana the edge of the lagoon
fa ’ahou again
pätia to spear (a fish)
Translate:
7 teie mahäna ’e piti ’ahuru no fepuare matahiti tauatini ’e iva
hanere ’e ono ’ahuru ma va’u te hina’aro nei ’o Teri’i täne ’ia f a ’a ’ite
vau ’icma 7 te huru no te ’ohipa ravaai 7 Tahiti. ’E f a ’a ’ite ätu vau
’iäna 7 te huru no te rava’ai ’upe’a nä te pae ä ’au. ’E raverahi mau
va’a ’e haere nä te pae ä ’au. ’E tu’u rätou 7 te ’upe’a nä te pae ä ’au
mai te tiahi mai 7 te i ’a 7 roto 7 te ’upe’a. T reira, ’e f a ’a ’ati hia te
’upe’a. T muri iho, ’e pou rätou 7 roto 7 te miti no te rave mai 7 te
i ’a, ’a tu’u ätu ai 7 roto 7 te mau va’a.
T muri iho 7 te reira, ’e taui rätou 7 te vähi tai’ara’a. ’E haere
rätou 7 te pae moana ’e tu’u f a ’ahou 7 tä rätou ’upe’a. Te mau va’a
f a ’a ’ati, nä rätou ’e haere ’e tiahi mai 7 te i ’a 7 roto 7 te ’upe’a.
7 muri iho ’e pou rätou 7 roto 7 te miti nö te pätia mai 7 te i ’a. T muri
iho ’a tu’u ätu ai 7 roto 7 te mau va’a.
Lesson 24
CONJUNCTIONS
133. Usage
This final lesson discusses the usage of the most usual conjunctions
in Tahitian which have not already been treated above. Some
conjunctions are:
’aore ra or ’e riro paha perhaps
'ia ’ore ra otherwise, lest ’oia ho’i namely, that is
’aita ra otherwise no reira therefore
ter a ra but, however noa ätuä although
are’a ra however e and
’e paha perhaps aua ’e fortunately
Examples of usage are as follows:
7 te mahäna mä’a ’aore ra ’i te tapati
on Saturday or Sunday
tepua’atoro ’aore ra tepua’ahorofenua
the bull or the horse
’E rave maita’i täua 7 te ’ohipa ’ia ’ore ra ’e ’ita ia tci tana puta
’e oti.
We two must work well; otherwise our book will not be
finished.
’aita ra ’e ’ita ia te fare ’e oti
otherwise the house would not have been finished
’Ua mana ’o vau ’e haere ’e tanu 7 te taro, tera ra ’ua mo ’e ta ’u ope.
I thought I would go and plant taros, but I have lost my shovel.
’E haere mai ’oia ’e riro paha 7 te tapati.
Perhaps he will come on Sunday.
’E riro paha ’oia 7 te haere mai.
Perhaps he will come.
te mau rätere, ’oia ho’i te mau feiä tei haere mai nö te mäta’ita’i
the tourists, that is, the people who come to visit
No reira ’cia 7 haere ai ’e tunu 7 te mä’a.
Therefore, she went to prepare the food.
Noa ätuä ia te mahäna, ’e to’eto’e noa.
Although the sun is shining it is still cold.
CONJUNCTIONS 107
te täüpo’o e te piripou
the hat and the trousers
Te haere ra vau ’e ta’oto; auä’e ’oe 7 tciniuniu mai.
I was just going to bed; fortunately you rang then.
134. Pearl-shell Diving
Vocabulary:
hopu to dive, bathe 7' full, to fill
te pärau the pearl-shell te taura the rope
tupu to take place tä ’amu to tie
te ’ava’e the month te tapau the lead weight
fa ’a ’ati to surround tae to arrive
te ä ’au the reef ’oi ’oi quickly
7 ropu in the middle 7 raro at the bottom
te miti the sea f a ’a’ite to signal, tell
te va’a the outrigger canoe ho 7 to return
te pur er a ’a the prayer hapono to send
nä mua ä ’e before te feiä-rave- the pearl-shell
fa ’aea to remain pärau merchants
huti
te ’ete
Translate:
to pull up, pull
the basket
roa’a to obtain
Te ’ohipa no te hopura’a pa ran ’e tupu ia 7 te mau fenua Tuamotu
7 te mau matahiti ’ato’a. ’E tupu te hopura’a pärau, ’e torn ’ava’e
te maorora’a ’aore ra ’e maha. ’Ua ’ite tätou te fenua Tuamotu, ’e
mea fa ’a ’ati hia ’oia ’e te a ’au. T ropu 7 te fenua te vai ra ia te miti.
E, 7 te reira vähi ’e hopu hia ai te pärau.
No te haere ’e hopu 7 te pärau, ’e haere te mau ta ’ata na ni ’a 7 to
ratou mau va’a 7 ropu 7 te miti. Ta tae ratou 7 reira, ’e fa ’aoti ratou
7 te pur er a ’a na mua a ’e ’a hopu ai. ’E piti ta’ata 7 ni’a 7 te va’a
ho ’e, ho ’e te hopu, e ho ’e te fa ’aea 7 ni ’a iho 7 te va ’a no te huti mai 7
tepärau ’o te fa ’a’ihia mai ’e te ta’ata hopu. Teie ta’ata hopu, ’e hopu
’oia na ni ’a 7 te ho ’e taura ’o tei ta ’amu hia te tapau 7 ni ’a iho, no te,
mea, na teie tapau 7 ni’a te taura ’e fa ’atae ’oi’oi ’iäna 7 raro 7 te miti.
Ta tae ’oia 7 raro, ’e rave ’oia 7 tana ’ete ’e fa ’a ’i 7 te pärau. Ia 7, e,
no te fa ’a’ite 7 te ta’ata huti 7 ni’a 7 te va’a, ’e huti ’oia ’e tcru hutira’a
7 ni’a 7 te taura. T te reira taime ’e ho’i mai ’oia 7 ni’a; ’e huti
’ato’a hia te ’etepärau.
Ta fa ’aoti teie hopura’a pärau, ’e hapono hia ia te mau pärau nä te
mau feiä-rave-pärau 7 Pape’ete. E, 7 te reira taime ia tü rätou moni
’e roa’a mai ai.
FURTHER PASSAGES
FOR TRANSLATION
135. Tahiti
Vocabulary:
parau a w o rd , to spe ak te mat a ’eina ’a th e d is tric t
te mo tu th e islan d te marae th e tem p le
te a’ihu’ara’au th e d e p a r tm e n t te vahi th e p la ce , sp o t
te fenua th e la n d , c o u n try tanu to p la n t
pü p rin c ip a l, m a in te to th e su g a r-c a n e
’oia ho’i n am ely te tihota th e su g a r
te ’oire th e tow n te ta’ata-papa’i- th e a r tis t
te mata’i th e wind hoho ’a
paraparau to co n v e rse, ta lk te f a ’a’amura’a th e b re e d in g
te huru th e subje ct, te pua’atoro th e c a ttle
m a n n e r Niu Terani N ew Z e a la n d
mana ’o to th in k te f a ’arava ’i th e in c re ase
reva to leave, d e p a r t te ü th e milk
’ap'i new te hotera th e h o te l
hamani to b u ild tama’a to e a t a t ta b le
te purumu th e stre e t te ’otu’e th e p o in t, p rom tata’i
to re p a ir o n to ry
te tau th e time, te mori-turama- th e lig h th o u se
o c c asio n ava
riro to b ecom e te ti’i th e sta tu e
mata’ita’i to lo o k a t, a dm ire te ’o’o’a th e b ay
te rötere th e to u r is t fa ’ari ’i to receive
’e raverahi m an y fa ’atupu to o rg an ise
tae to a rriv e , come te tömö’ara’a th e fea st
Marite Am e ric a te taera’a th e a rriv a l
te ruperupe th e b e a u ty Ronetona L o n d o n
’ite to see fa ’afa ’aea to re st, stay
nö mua a ’e b efo re
T r a n s la te :
Teie te mau parau no te mau mo tu a’ihu’ara’au Farani no Polinetia,
’oia ho’i ’o Tahiti te fenua pU, ’oia ho’i te ’oire nö Pape’ete. T muri
TAHITI 109
ö ’e 7 te reira, te vai nei te mau motu nö n i’a mata’i, te mau motu
Tuamotu, Ma’areva, Matuita, te mau motu nö raro mata’i, Ra’iötea,
Borabora, Huahine, Maupiti. 7 teie nei ’e paraparau vau 7 te huru nö
te fenua ’o Pape’ete, Tahiti.
T Pape’ete ’ato’a te vai nei te tahi mau fare 'api te hamani hia ra,
te mau purumu te tötö’i hia ra. No reira, ’e nehenehe ’ia par au hia 7
teie mau tau 7 mua nei ’e riro ia te ’oire nö Pape’ete ’ei mäta’ita’ira’a
na. te mau feiö rötere; no te mea ’e raverahi te mau feiö rötere ’e tae
mai 7 Pape’ete, mai te fenua Marite mai, nö te fenua Faröni mai,
Peretane mai, te fenua Europa mai, nö te möta’ita’i 7 te huru ’ö te
ruperupe ’ö te fenua Tahiti.
Teie te mau ’ohipa ’e ’ite hia ’e te mau feiö rötere ’ia tae ötu rötou 7
Tahiti. Nö mua ö ’e ’e tae rötou 7 te mata’eina’a nö Pa’ea, e ’ite rötou
7 te marae nö Arahurahu. ’Ei reira ’e tae ötu rötou 7 Atimaono, te
vöhi matamua 7 tanu hia te tö nö te hamani 7 te tihota. ’E haere ötu
rötou 7 Mataiea, Papeari. Tei reira te vöhi pü nö te ta’ata-pöpa’ihoho’a
’o Paul Gaugin töne. Mai reira ’e haere ötu rötou 7 Taravao.
Tei reira te mau f a ’a ’amura’a pua’atoro rahi ö ’e nö Tahiti. ’E mau
pua’atoro nö te fenua Niu Terani mai, tei f a ’atae hia mai 7 Tahiti nö
te f a ’arava’i 7 te ü no Tahiti. Mai reira ’e tae ötu rötou 7 Afa’ahiti.
Tei reira te hotera Faratea. ’E raverahi mau rötere ’e haere 7 reira ’e
tömö ’a öi.
’E ho’i mai rötou 7 Pape’ete nö te mata’eina’a nö Hitia’a, Fa’aone,
Papeno’o, Ha’apape. IIou rötou ’a tae ai 7 Pape’ete, ’e haere rötou 7
te ’otu’e nö Ha’apape, ’oia te Pointe Venus. ’E möta’ita’i rötou 7 te
mori-turama-öva. Tei reira ’ato’a te t i ’i ’o te ta’ata Peretane ra ’o
Captain Cook, tei tae mai 7 Tahiti 7 te matahiti tauatini ’e hitu hanere
’e öno ’ahuru ma iva 7 te ’o ’o ’a nö Matavai. ’Ua f a ’ari’i hia ’oia ’e te
ari’i-vahine ’o Pomare maha. T muri ö ’e 7 te reira ’ua f a ’atupu hia te
hö’e tömö’ara’a nö tö rötou taera’a mai. Te ’ite nei ia tötou e, te mau
feiö matamua 7 tae mai 7 Tahiti nei, ’e mau feiö nö Peretane mai.
’Ua rave ’ato’a rötou 7 te ’ohipa nö te Evaneria 7 Tahiti.
CONVERSATIONAL 110 TAHITIAN
136. Things to do in Tahiti
Vocabulary:
’e aha te huru? how are things?
fa ’afa ’aea to stop, cease
te Ha the rain
mai te peu e if
fa ’a ’ati to visit, tour
te mata’eina’a the district
te ruperupe the beauty
’e raverahi there are many
te rötere the tourist
te mau motu raro mata’i the lies Sous le Vent
mata’ita’i to visit, admire
ana’e also, as well
te vöhi ’orira’a the nightclub (dancing)
te vöhi himenera’a the night-spot (singing)
e te vai atura etcetera
te ’ori the dance
te himene the song
maurUru thank you
te f a ’a ’itera’a the information
’e riro paha perhaps
te f a ’afa’aeara’a the stay, holiday
te ’oa’oa the pleasure, delight
mau true, real
Translate:
“’E aha te huru 7 Tahiti nei 7 teie mau mahcina ?”
“Mea maita 7. ’Ua fa ’afa ’aea ri 7 te Ua. Mea maita 7 roa 7 teze mau
mahana
“ ’E aha te ’ohipa tö ’u ’e nehenehe ’e rave ’ananahi?”
“Mai te peu e 'e’ita ’e ua, ’e nehenehe ia tci ’oe ’e haere ’e f a ’a ’ati
na te mau mata’eina’a. ’Ei reira ’oe ’e ’ite ai 7 te ruperupe ’o te fenua.
’E nehenehe ’ato’a ’oe ’e haere a tu 7 Mo’orea, no te mea ’e raverahi
mau rötere ’e haere nei 7 te reira vöhi. ’E nehenehe ’ato’a ’oe ’e haere
roa atu 7 te mau motu raro mata’i, ’oia ho’i ’o Huahine, Ra’iatea,
Borabora, tei ’ia ’oe te hina’arora’a.”
“E mea maita’i roa. 'Ananahi ’e t i ’i mai ’oe ’ia’u; ’e haere taua ’e
mata’ita’i 7 te mau mata’eina’a. Ta mana’o vau ’e ’ita ihoa ’e Ua
’ananahi. Na reira ia, ’e haere mai ’oe ’e ti 7 ’ia ’u ’ananahi ’ia po ’ipo 7
7 te hora hitu e te afa.”
“E, ’e haere mai vau ’e t i ’i ’ia ’oe ’ananahi. ’Ehaere taua ’e f a ’a ’ati
7 Tahiti.”
“’E aha ana’e a te ’ohipa ’e rave hia 7 Tahiti nei?”
THINGS TO DO IN TAHITI 111
“7 te po, ’e nehenehe ’oe ’e haere ’e mat a ’it a 7 ’e te mau vähi ’orira’a,
te mau vähi himenera’a, mai te Bar Lea, te Hotera Ta’aone, te
Pu’o’oro Plage, te Hotera Tahiti e te vai ätura. ’E nehenehe ta ’oe ’e
haere ’e mata’ita’i ’ato’a 7 te mau ’ori no te fenua nei, te ’ori Tahiti,
te tamure, te pa’o ’a, te hivinau, te aparima, e raverahi atu 5.”
“MaurUru roa 7 tä ’oe f a ’a'iter a a mai ’ia’u 7 te huru nö teie vähi
’o Tahiti. Te mana’o nei vau ’e riro paha teie fa ’afa’aeara’a iö’u 7
Tahiti 7 te mea ’oa’oa mau nä’u
CONVERSATIONAL 112 TAHITIAN
137. Planting Sweet Potatoes
Vocabulary:
tanu to plant ha ’apo 7 to cover up
te ’umara the sweet potato ’e nehenehe one can
te ’ata the stalks, lianas p m to water
maoro for a long time te pape the water
tupu to grow mai te peu e if
te ’apo’o the hole te mahUna the sun
tu’u to put in, deposit te Urea the period
’o to dig pa ’ari to be hard, mature
ha ’aputu to heap up ’aore ra or
te repo the earth, soil te mU ’a the fruit
oti to finish tatara to dig up
Translate:
No te tanu 7 te ’umara, ’e tUpü hia mai ia te ’ata ’o te mau ’umara
tei maoro te tupura’a. ’E hamani hia te mau ’apo’o no te tanura’a 7
te ’ata ’umara. ’E tu’u hia ter a mau ’ata 7 roto 7 te mau ’apo’o tei ’o
hia, e tei ha’aputu hia 7 te repo. ’Ia oti 7 te tu’u hia te ’ata ’umara
7 roto 7 te ’apo’o, ’e ha’apo’i hia ’oia. ’E nehenehe ’ia pipi hia 7 te
pape te mau ’ata ’umara tanu ’apt, mai te peu e ’aita ’e Ua, mai te
peu e ’e mea puai roa te mahUna.
Te taime tanura’a ’umara, tei roto ia 7 te Urea no te ’ava’e me,
tiunu, tiurai. Te taime ’e nehenehe ai ’e ’amu 7 te ’umara, ’oia ho’i,
7 te taime ’e p a ’ari ai ’oia, ’epae ’aore ra ’e hitu ’ava’e te maorora’a ’e
nehenehe ’ia ’amu hia te reira mau ’umara. Ta p a ’ari te mU’a, ’e
nehenehe ’ia tatara hia mai, mai roto mai 7 te repo.
THE EEL’S HOLE 113
138. The Eel’s Hole
Vocabulary:
te ’apo’o the hole te tau the time, period
te puhi the eel te feiä tai ’a the fisherman
te ’a ’amu the legend te ’aito the champion
pauroa all Ta ’ari 7 Taarii
hoe to paddle pätia to spear
nä ni’a in te toro’a the job, trade
te va’a the canoe te hui ra’atira the people
’amu to eat noa always
te ’otu’e the promontory, mana ’o to think
point ha ’apohe to kill
topa to give a name to ora to live
te i ’oa the name fa ’ahou again
te rahira’a the majority te ’auri the spear
’ato’a also
Translate:
7 teie mahana ’e parauparau vau 7 te ’a ’amu no te ’apo’o puhi.
Te vai ra 7 te mau motu raro mata’i, ’oia ho’i ’o Taha’a, te mata’eina’a
no Poutoru, te ho’e puhi rahi roa; ’e ’amu noa ’oia 7 te mau ta’ata.
Pauroa te mau ta’ata ’e hoe mai nä ni’a iho 7 te va’a, ’ia tae 7 ter a
vcihi, ’oia ho’i te ’apo’o puhi, ’ei reira rätou ’e ’amu hia ai ’e ter a puhi.
Te vai ra ’oia 7 te ho’e ’otu’e tei topa hia te i ’oa te ’apo’o puhi, ’oia
ho’i te ’otu’e ’o ’apo’o puhi. E, net reira te ta’ata te haere mai te
mata’eina’a nä ni’a 7 te va’a, te rahira’a ’e 'amu hia ia ’e tauapuhi ra.
Te vai ’ato’a ra 7 te reira tau ’e raverahi mau feiä teil’a. Te ’aito 7
te reira tau no te reira mata’eina’a ’o Ta’ari’i ia. ’E ta’ata-patia-i’a
tona toro’a. Te ’ite nei te hui ra’atira no teie mata’eina’a ’e ’amu noa
teie puhi 7 te mau ta’ata ’e hoe nä ni’a 7 te va’a. ’Ua mana’o rätou 7
te ho’e mahana ’e haere ’e pätia ha’apohe roa 7 te puhi, ’ia ’ore ’oia
’e ’amu f a ’ahou 7 te mau ta’ata ’e hoe mai nä ni’a 7 te va’a no te haere
7 te mata’eina’a.
T te tahi mahäna ’ua haere mai ’o Ta’ari’i e täna ’äuri. ’Ua ’ite
’oia 7 teie puhi tei rapae 7 tona ’apo’o. ’Ua mana’o ’ona ’e pätia
ha ’apohe roa 7 teie puhi, ’ia ora te mau ta ’ata ’e hoe nä ni ’a 7 te va ’a,
’eiaha rätou ’ia ’amu f a ’ahou hia ’e tera puhi. T te reira taime ’ua
pätia ha’apohe roa ’oia 7 tera puhi. Mai te reira taime te topara’a
hia te t ’oa ’o taua ’otu’e ra, te ’otu’e ’o ’apo’o puhi.
114 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
139. The Fourteenth of July
Vocabulary:
riro
te mahäna ’oa ’oara ’a
te hau
fa ’atupu
fa ’ahanahana
te ’arearea
te taviri
fa ’anehenehe
ha ’amata
te ’or o ’a
matara
’e tae ätu
te a ’ahiäta
te p o ’ipo’i
te ta’urua
porote
te nu’u
putuputu
te äroä
te tavana rahi
fa ’aea
ha’apoupou
te feiä porote
te tai
te reva
tere
te muto’i
te pupu
te f a ’ehau
te himene
te ’ote’a
te mau feiä fa ’a ’eta ’eta tino
te mau feiä tu’epopo
te mau feiä taorapopo
te f a ’aro’o
te porotetani
te tatorita
te momoni
te tanito
te petania
te fare ha ’api ’ira ’a
to become
the festival
the Republic, government
to organise
to celebrate
the amusement
the game
to embellish, beautify
to start, commence
the feast, festival
to start
until
the early morning, dawn
the morning
the feast, festival
to walk in procession
the army
to assemble
the street, avenue
the Governor
to reserve, remain
to applaud
the members of the procession
the navy
the air force
to go past
the police
the group
the soldier
the song
the dance
the athletes
the footballers
the basketballer
the religion
the Protestants
the Catholics
the Mormons
the Sanito Church
the Bethany Church
the school
THE FOURTEENTH OF JULY 115
fa ’ari 7 to receive
te hui mana the officials
te inuinura’a
te ’orira’a hanahana
te peretiteni
te hoera’a-va’a
te ta ’ahira’a-pere’o ’o
te f a ’ahorora’a
te pu a ’ahorofenua
te mahäna hope’a
’opani
the drink, toast
the grand ball
the Presidency
the canoe race
the bicycle race
the race
the horse
the last day
to close, finish
Translate:
Te parau no te ’ahuru ma maha no tiurai.
Te 'ahuru ma maha no tiurai ’ua riro ia ’ei mahäna ’oa’oara’a nä
te hau Faräni. No reira 7 te fenua Tahiti ’e f a ’atupu ’ato ’a hia te
mahäna ’oro ’a no te ’ahuru ma maha no tiurai. No te fa ’ahanahanara ’a
7 te ’ahuru ma maha no tiurai 7 Tahiti, ’e hamani hia ia te mau fare
’ar ear ear a ’a, te mau fare tauirira’a nä te mau vähi ’ato’a ’o te ’oire,
mai te fa ’anehenehe hia 7 te mau tiare ’ato ’a ’o te fenua.
Ta tae 7 te ’ahuru ma torn no tiurai, te mahäna ia ’e ha’amata ai
te mau ’oro’a, te hora ’e matara ai te mau fare tiurai, mai te hora
’ahuru ma piti ia no te ’ahuru ma torn no tiurai ’e tae ätu 7 te hora
piti 7 te a ’ahiäta. Ta p o ’ipo’i ä ’e ’oia ho’i te ’ahuru ma maha, te
mahäna rahi no te ta ’urua, 7 te hora va’u 7 te p o ’ipo’i ’e tupu ia te
porotera’a a te mau nu’u huru rau e raverahi ätu ä. 7 te p o ’ipo’i
’ahuru ma maha. no tiurai 7 te hora va’u, ’e putuputu pauroa te mau
ta ’ata 7 te vähi porotera’a, ’oia ho’i 7 te äroä Bruat. Ta haere mai
te tavana rahi ’o te fenua 7 tona vähi f a ’aeara’a no te ha’apoupou 7
te mau fe iä porote, ’e tere mai ia 7 te reira taime te mau moto no te
mau muto 7 faräni. T muri ä ’e 7 te reira, te mau pupu fa ’ehau huru
rau to te fenua, to te tai e tö te reva. T muri ä ’e 7 te reira, ’e porote
mai te mau pupu himene, te mau pupu ’ote ’a, te mau pupu fa ’a ’eta ’etara ’a
tino, te pupu tu’epopo, taorapopo e raverahi ätu ä. ’E porote ’a to ’a
mai te mau pupu no te mau f a ’aro’o ’ato’a, ’oia ho’i te porotetani,
tatorita, te momoni, te tanito, te petania. ’Eporote ’ato ’a ho’i te mau
tamari 7 no te mau fare ha ’api ’ira ’a ’ato ’a.
Ta oti te porotera’a, ’e f a ’a ri’i mai te tavana rahi 7 te mau hui
mana ’ato ’a no te ho ’e inuinura ’a. T te reira taime ’e matara ia te mau
fare ’areareara’a, te mau fare tavirira’a no te tiurai ’e tae roa ätu 7 te
hora ono 7 te p o ’ipo’i. T te reira ’ato ’a pd, ’e tupu ia te ’orira’a
hanahana mai te peretiteni hia ’e te tavana rahi ’o te fenua.
Te ta ’urua no tiurai ’e tupu ia, ’e piti hepetoma te maorora’a.
’E raverahi mau ’ohipa ’e rave hia 7 roto 7 te reira nau hepetoma ’e
i
116 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
piti, te mau ’o te ’a, te mau himene, te mau hoera’a-va’a, te mau
ta ’ahira’a-pere’o ’o, te f a ’ahorora’a pua’ahorofenua. ’E rave hia ia 7
roto 7 te reira nau hepetoma ’e piti. 7 muri ä ’e 7 te reira, te mahäna
hope’a no te piti o te hepetoma ’o te ’opanira’a ia te ta ’urua rahi no
tiurai, ’oia ho’i te 'oro’a rahi ’ä te hau Farani.
ORANGE-PICKING 117
140. Orange-picking
Vocabulary:
pafa’i to pick, pluck
te ’anani the orange
te fa ’a the valley
te tau the season
mätau to be accustomed
ti’i to pick
7 roto in, inside
7 te po’ipo’i roa early in the morning
te püte the bag
te ’ahu the clothes
no te mea because
7 uta at the bottom
te area the period
haere na raro noa to go on foot
te vahi the place
fa ’afa’aea to rest
fa ’ahou once more, again
huru ätea ätu further away
te üru ’anani the orange plantation
te parara’a the ripening
7 ni 'a on
te tumu the tree
re’are’a yellow
pa’uma to climb up
fa ’a’i to fill
’oa ’oa pleasure, pleasant
te ruperupe the beauty
te haviti mau the true splendour
hi’o to look at
pou to descend
7 raro down
mai te amo mai while carrying
ämo to carry on the shoulders
7 muri iho after, after that, next
’a tae roa ätu until, as far as
papü flat
’oia ho’i namely
Translate:
Te pafa’ira’a ’anani 7 te fa ’a no Puna’aru’u Tahiti. Ta tae 7 te
tau no te pafa’ira’a ’anani no te f a ’a no Puna’aru’u 7 te mata’eina’a
no Puna’aui.j, ’e haere te mau ta’ata ’ato’a tei mätau 7 te haere ’e ti’i
118 Conversational tahitian
7 te ’anani 7 roto 7 te reira f a ’a. ’E haere rätou 7 te po ’ipo’i roa e tä
rätou mauptite e tö rätou mau ’aim e te ’ahu ta ’oto no tepo, no te mea
’ia haere ’e pafa’i 7 te ’anani 7 te reira f a ’a, ’e ta’oto ia te mau ta’ata
7 uta. ’Ia po ’ipo’i, ’ei reira rätou ’e pafa’i ai 7 te ’anani. Te tau
no tepafa’ira’a ’anani no Puna’aru’u, tei roto ia 7 te ärea nö te ’ava’e
me, tiunu, tiurai, atete.
’E haere rätou 7 te p j ’ipo’i roa nä raro noa. T te ähiähi ’ua tae ia
rätou 7 te vähi f a ’afa’aeara’a. T te reira taime ’e tämä’a r i’i rätou e
ta’oto, e, ’ia p o ’ipo’i ä ’e, ’e haere f a ’ahou rätou 7 te tahi vähi huru
ätea ätu, e, tei reira te Uru 'anani nö te f a ’a nö Puna’aru’u.
Ta tae 7 teparara’a no te ’anani, ’e mea rahi roa te ’anani 7 n i’a 7
te tumu. ’E re’are’a noa 7 n i’a 7 te mau tumu. ’1a tae te mau ta’ata
7 te reira vähi, ’e p a ’uma rätou nö te pafa’i 7 te ’anani e nö te f a ’a ’i
tä rätcu maupüte. ’E raverahi mau ta ’ata ’e haere, nö te mea ’e mea
’oa’oa nä rätou 7 te haere 7 roto 7 te f a ’a no Puna’aru’u nö töna
ruperupe e te haviti mau ’ia hi ’o hia.
Ta oti tä rätou pafa’ira’a ’anani, ’e pou mai rätou 7 raro, mai te
ämo mai 7 te ’ anani tä rätou 7pafa’i mai. ’E mea huru ätea ’ia haere.
’E raverahi mau taime ’e fa ’afa ’aea rätou. 7 muri iho, ’e haere fa ’ahou,
’a tae roa ätu ai 7 te vähipapu, ’oia ho’i 7 te mata’eina’a nö Puna’auia.
THE APETAHI FLOWER 119
141. The Apetahi Flower
Vocabulary:
te parau the word, description mai like, as
te tiare the flower mahora to spread open
apetahi name of a flower po ’o ’a to make a noise
äre’a ra however ’uo ’uo white
tupu to grow, exist matie green
äna’e only te a ’ahiäta the dawn
te mou’a the mountain fa ’aro ’o to listen to
pafa’i to pick, gather e different
te ’u’ä the bloom mätau to be used to
Translate:
Te vai ra ia ’e raverahi te mau tiare; are’a ra 7 te motu no Ra’iätea
te vai ra ia te ho’e tiare ’e ’ita ’e tupu ’i te mau vähi ’ato’a; ’oia ho’i
te tiare apetahi. Taua tiare ra, tei te fenua Ra’iätea äna’e ia.
Te vähi tei reira tera tiare, tei ni’a ia 7 te mou’a ra ’3 Temehani.
’E raverahi mau ta’ata ’e haere 7 te tahi mau taime ’e pafa’i mai 7
teie tiare, ’oia ho’i te tiare apetahi, no te mea ’e ’ere tona ’ua mai to
te mau tiare ’ato’a. ’Ia mahora tona ’ua 7 te p o ’ipo’i, ’e p o ’o ’a 'oia.
’Ia mahora mai, ’e mahora ’oia mai te rima ta’ata. ’E tiare nehenehe
roa, mea ’uo ’uo ’3 mua, e, ’e mea matie ’3 raro a ’e mai.
N3 te haere ’e t i ’i 7 teie tiare, ’e haere ia te ta’ata 7 te p o ’ipo’i roa
n3 te tae ätu 7 te vähipafa’ira’a 7 te p3. ’Ei reira rätou ’e ta’oto ai.
E ’ia a ’ahiäta, ’e haere rätou 7 piha’i iho 7 teie mau tiare no te f a ’aro’o
7 te p o ’o ’ara’a mai, n3 te mea ’ia mahora t3 rätou ’ua ’e p o ’o ’a ’oia.
’E tiare maere rahi mau teie. ’E ’ere ’oia mai te mau tiare ’ato’a tei
mätau hia ’e te ta’ata.
120 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
142. House-building
Vocabulary:
hamani to build
te fare the house
te ni ’au the coconut tree leaves
ma ’ohi Polynesian
te tumu the trunk of a tree
te pou the post
täpo 7 to cover
te ’ofe the bamboo
ha ’une to weave
te paruru the wall, screen
te ‘opani the door
te ha’amaramarama the window
te tumu ha 'ari the trunk of a coconut tree
te rä ’au the tree
’afaro straight
te purau a kind of tree (Hibiscus tiliaceous)
te ’aho the rafter
fa ’ati ’a to sink a post, to agree
tümau to attach, make fast
te tahua the floor
tu’u to put in
poto short
äto to thatch
Translate:
Te hamanira’a 7 te hb’e fare Tahiti, ’oia ho’i te fare ni’au. No te
hamani 7 te ho’e fare ma’ohi, ’e täpü hia ia te ni’au; ’e täpü ’ato’a
hia te tumu ha ’ari. ’E rave hia te mau tumu no te hamani 7 te pou no
te fare. ’E rave hia te mau ni ’au no te täpo 7 7 te fare. ’E täpü ’ato ’a
hia te ’ofe, ’e ha ’une hia no te hamani 7 te paruru no te fare, te ’opani e
te mau ha’amaramarama.
No te hamanira’a 7 te mau pou ’e rave hia ia te mau tumu ha’ari.
No te tapo’i 7 te fare, ’e ha’une hia ia te ni’au. E ’ia oti, ’e tapo’i
hia ia te fare 7 te mau ni’au ha’une hia. ’E täpü ’ato’a hia te mau
rä’au ’afaro, ’oia ho’i te mau rä’au purau e, ’e raverahi ätu ä, nö te
hamani 7 te ’aho ’o te fare. Ta oti te mau pou 7 te f a ’ati’a hia, ’e
tümau hia ia te mau ’aho. 7a oti te reira, e ä to hia ia te fare. T muri
iho ’e hamani hia te tahua ’b te fare. ’E tu’u hia te mau pou potopoto
nü roto, e, ’e tümau hia te tahua 7 te ’ofe ’o tei ha’une hia. ’E tümau
hia te mau paruru ’ofe, te mau ha’amaramarama e te mau ’opani.
’Ua oti ia 7 teie nei te hb’e fare ma’ohi.
FISHING WITH STONES 121
143. Fishing with Stones
Vocabulary:
te tautai fishing
taora to throw
te ’ofa’i the stone
ten ’a to fish
te tau the time
fa ’atupu to organise
fa ’ari 7 to receive, welcome
te hui ra’atira the population
te himene the song
te ’ori the dance
te tömö’ara’a the feast
fa ’a ’ati to visit, tour
mata’ita’i to observe, admire
f a ’anaho to organise
tömau to wear, put on
te hei the crown of flowers
te ’arapo’a the neck,throat
te pareu the loin-cloth
rau diverse, numerous
te ’aua the enclosure
ate a far, distant
tiahi to chase
horo to run
te tahatai the shore
pata to take a photo
te hoho’a the photo
taviri to film
’ana ’anatae pleasing, eager, enthusiastic
Translate:
Te tautai taora 7 te fenua Borabora. ’E tupu ia teie huru tai’ara’a
7 te mau mahöna ’e raverahi te mau rät ere ’e haere 7 te fenua Borabora.
7 te reira taime ’e fa ’atupu hia te ho ’e fa ’ari ’ira ’a 7 te mau rötere nä
te hui ra’atira no Borabora, 'oia ho’i, te mau himene, te mau ’ori e te
mau tämä’ara’a Tahiti. Ta oti te reira, ’e haere te mau rötere ’e
fa ’a ’ati 7 te fenua Borabora. Ta oti, ’e haere ratou ’e mata’ita’i 7
te huru no te ’ohipa o te tautai taora 7 Borabora.
Teie te f a ’anahora’a no teie huru tautai. ’E haerepauroa te mau hui
ra’atira no Borabora, te töne e te vahine mai te tömau mai 7 te hei
7 ni’a 7 te üpo’o, 7 te ’arapo’a, mai te tömau ’ato’a mai 7 te mau
pareu, ’ua rau te huru. T te reira taime ’e haere ratou 7 roto 7 te
miti no te hamani 7 te hb’e ’aua ’ofa’i. Ta oti te reira, ’e haere ia te
122 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
hui ra ’atira ta ’ato ’a, te töne, te vahine, te mau tamari 7 7 te ho ’e vahi
atea ma te taora 7 te ’ofa’i 7 roto 7 te miti no te tiahi 7 te i ’a 7 roto
7 te ’aua. 7 te reira taime ’e horo pauroa te i ’a 7 roto 7 te ’aua 7 te
pae tahatai.
7 mVa te mau rötere ’e haere mai ia ’e mata’ita’i 7 te mau i ’a 7
roto 7 te ’aua ma te pata 7 te hoho’a, ma te taviri 7' te hoho’a no
teie hum tautai. ’E nehenehe tö te mau rötere p a ’ato’a ’e haere 7
roto 7 te ’aua I’a, ma te rave mai 7 te I’a tö ratou ’e hina’aro. No teie
huru tautai 7 te fenua Borabora ’e mea ’ana’anatae roa ia na te mau
rötere. E no reira ’e raverahi te mau rötere ’e haere 7 te fenua
Borabora no te mata’ita’i 7 teie huru ta'i’ara’a.
THE BREADFRUIT LEGEND 123
144. The Breadfruit Legend
Vocabulary:
te ’a ’amu the legend pahono to answer
te ’uru the breadfruit ta’i to cry
te tau the time fa ’ahou again
matamua first roa ’a to be obtained
pohe to die ha ’apohe to cause to die
toe to remain riro to become
äna ’e alone te tumu ’uru the breadfruit tree
f a ’a ’apu to cultivate ho tu to produce, bear
te mou’a the mountain fruit
’imi to gather, collect ära to wake up
ö ’e to be in a state tupu to be present, grow
of famine 7 to be full
fifi to be in difficulties ’oa ’oa to be happy
te pae tahatai the sea-shore auä’e fortunately
mihi
noa
Translate:
to weep, lament
always
te tino the body
7 te tau matamua te vai ra ia te ho’e metua vahine, ’ua poke täna
täne, e, ’e mea rahi roa tana mau tamari’i. 7 te reira tau, ’oia ho’i
7 te tau matamua 7 te pohera’a täna täne, ’ua toe noa mai ’oia ana’e
iho e täna mau tamari’i. No reira, no te f a ’a ’amura’a 7 täna mau
tamari’i ’e haere ’oia ’e fa ’a ’apu no te tanu 7 te mä’a. Nä mua ä’e,
nä täna ia täne ’e haere ’e fa ä ’apu, e ’e ’imi 7 te mä ’a no te Ja ’a ’amu
’ia rätou. 7 teie nei ’ua poke te täne ’ä taua vahine ra; näna ätura
ia ’e ’imi 7 te mä’a.
7 taua tau ra ’ua o’e pauroa te fenua 7 te mä’a. ’Ua fifi roa teie
vahine e täna mau tamari’i, no te mea te o’e nei ’e rätou 7 te mä’a.
7 te talii mahäna ’ua haere ’oia 7 te pae tahatai e ’ua mihi noa ’oia 7
täna täne.
7 te reira taime ’ua haere mai te ho’e ta’ata. ’Ua parau ätu ’iäna
“’<e aha tä ’oe ’e mihi nei?”
’Ua pahono ätu teie vahine: “te mihi nei vau nö te mea ’aita tä
mätou ’e mä’a fa ’ahou.”
’Ua parau ätura teie ta’ata, “ 7 teie nei, ’eiaha ’oe ’e mihi nö te
mea ’e roa’a tä ’outou mä’a.” 7 te reira taime ’ua parau taua ta’ata
ra 7 teie vahine: “’eiaha roa ’oe ’e mihi f a ’ahou, nö te mea, ’ananahi
’ia po’ipo’i, ’ia ära mai ’oe, ’e ’ite ’oe 7 te hö’e tumu ’uru 7 mua 7
tö ’oe fare. Taua tumu ’uru ra, ’o tö’u ia tino ’o tä’u 7 f a ’ariro ’ei
tumu ’uru, ’ia ora ’oe e tä ’oe mau tamari’i.”
124 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
7 te po ’ipo 7 ä ’e 7 te ärara ’a mai tele vahine, ua tupu te tumu ’uru
’e te hotu noa ra. ’Ua 7 roa 7 te ma’a. ’Ua ’oa’oa roa teie vahine no te
mea ana’e teie ta’ata 7 ’amu ai ratou 7 te mä’a no te mea ’ua f a ’ariro
teie ta’ata 7 tona tino ’ei tumu ’uru. No reira mai, te ’a'amu no te
tumu ’uru, ’oia ho’i te ’uru.
THE LEPERS’ FEAST DAY 125
145. The Lepers’ Feast Day
Vocabulary:
te repera the leper
te ’oro’a the feast, celebration
parau to call, speak
hou ’a before
te tauiha’a the present, gift
hopoi to send
te pü the centre
te ha ’uti the toy
te tuha’a the part
fa ’ahanahana to honour
ha ’amata to open
te f a ’ata ’ira’a pü the fanfare
te f a ’ehau the soldier
fa ’ahou again, once more
pahono to reply
tomo to enter, come in
te f a ’aro’o the religion, sect
te pupu the group
te ähiähi the evening
te pupu fa ’a ’arearea the orchestra
’opani to close, end
te ta’a ’era’a the farewell
f a ’aoti to conclude
ho’i to return
Translate:
Te parau no te mau repera no Orofara Tahiti. ’E tupu 7 Tahiti 7 te
mau matahiti ’ato’a te ho’e ’oro’a no te mau repera no Tahiti, ’oia
ho’i no Orofara. ’E parau hia taua mahäna ra, te mahäna o te mau
repera. Hou ’a tupu ai teie ’oro’a rahi, ’e raverahi ia mau tauiha’a
’e hopoi hia 7 te pü no Orofara, te vähi tei reira te mau repera. ’E horo ’a
hia nä rätou ’e raverahi mau mä’a, te mau tauiha’a ’e tae roa ätu 7 te
mau ha ’uti nä te mau tamari 7, ’oia ’ato ’a ho 7 te mau tuha ’a moni.
Ta tae 7 taua mahäna ’oro’a ra, ’e haere ia te Tavana Rahi 7
Orofara no te f a ’ahanahana 7 te ’oro’a a te mau repera. T te reira
po ’ipo 7 ’e ha ’amata hia ia te ’oro ’a nä roto 7 te ho ’e fa ’ata ’ira ’a pü a
te mau f a ’ehau. Ta oti te reira, ’e paraparau mai te Tavana Rahi,
mai te pahono hia ätu ’e te Tavana no Orofara. ’E paraparau f a ’ahou
te Tavana Rahi no te pahonora’a 7 te Tavana no Orofara. Ta oti te
reira, ’o te mau himene ia nä to Orofara. 7 muri iho, ’e tomo mai te
mau huru f a ’aro’o ’ato’a, te mau pupu himene no te fa ’ahanahana 7
te ’oro’a ’ä te mau repera ’e tae roa ätu 7 te ähiähi.
126 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
7 taua mahäna ’ato’a ra, ’e raverahi mau himene ’e himene hia
mai ’e te mau repera iho no Orofara, ’oia ’ato’a ho’i te mau pupu
f a ’a ’arearea no te ’oire no Pape’ete, te mau pupu himene, e te ’ori,
’oia ho’i te pupu Heiva, te pupu Maeva Tahiti, te pupu Tahiti Nui, e te
pupu Paulina no te haere mai ’e f a ’ahanahana ’i taua ’or o ’a ra.
’E himene ’ato’a mai ia te mau pupu f a ’aro’o huru rau. No te ’opanira’a
’i teie ’oro’a ’e paraparau f a ’ahou ia te tavana no Orofara, mai te
ha’amaurüru hia atu ’e te Tavana Rahi. 7a oti, ’e himene hia mai te
himene no te ta’a ’era’a na te pupu iho no Orofara, e, ’o te f a ’aotira’a
ia te ’oro’a ’o te mau repera. 7 te reira taime ’e ho’ipauroa te mau
ta ’ata ’i te ‘oire nö Pape ’ete. ’O te huru ia te mau fa ’anahora ’a no te
’oro’a ’o te mau repera 7 Tahiti.
KEY TO EXERCISES
§ 14(a)
1. The house. 2. The men. 3. A dog. 4. Another man. 5. The
hands. 6. A few men. 7. A few houses. 8. Mr Peu. 9. The bitch.
10. The boar. 11. The bitch (with litter). 12. The rooster. 13. The
pawpaw (female). 14. The other houses. 15. Mrs Terii. 16. The
breed of dogs. 17. The shoal of fish. 18. The bundle of food.
19. The bunch of breadfruit. 20. The bunch of flowers. 21. The
Peu family. 22. The troop of men. 23. The bunch of mangoes.
24. The bunch of coconuts. 25. The bundle of breadfruit.
§14(b)
1. Te ta’ata. 2. Te mau ta’ata. 3. Te hd’e ’uri. 4. Na metua.
5. Na rima. 6. Tau na ta’ata. 7. Na parahira’a. 8. Teri’i täne.
9. Te 'uri ufa. 10. Te pua’a maia’a. 11. Te ’uri fanau’a. 12. Te
pinia mamoe. 13. Te mau ’uri uni. 14. Te moa ufa. 15. Tau na
moa ufa. 16. Te hö’e nana mamoe. 17. Te hd’e pu ’e tamähine.
18. Te hd’e nana ’uri. 19. Te atari mai’a. 20. Te hd’e ruru vahie.
21. Te hd’e pupa tiare. 22. Tehuimana. 23. TefeiataTa. 24. Peu
ma. 25. Te hd’e pupa vi.
§22(a)
1. There are three men. 2. Three dogs. 3. There are three fish.
4. There are twenty men. 5. There are two men. 6. The fifth night.
7. How many fish are there? 8. There are six. 9. The sixth girl.
10. It is twelve o’clock. 11. It is ten past three. 12. It is half past
seven. 13. The sixth of March. 14. It is two minutes to five.
15. Next week.
§22(b)
1. ’E toru tau na ta’ata. 2. Na ’uri ’e maha. 3. ’Ehia ta’ata tera?
4. ’E piti ta’ata. 5. Te dno ’d te pd. 6. ’E hora piti e te äfa. 7. ’E
dno miniti toe ’e hora toru ai. 8. ’E hora maha ma’iri ’e iva miniti.
9. ’E piti ’ahuru ma dno ta’ata. 10. Te maha no Titema. 11. Te
’ahuru ma hd’e no Me. 12. 7 te matahiti ’i mua. 13. Te mahäna
128 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
matamua no Eperera. 14. ’E ho’e ’ahuru miniti toe ’e hora ono ai.
15. Ono ’ahuru ha’ari.
§29(a)
1. Beautiful hands. 2. The good dogs. 3. The long outrigger
canoes. 4. The very good dog. 5. There are two good dogs.
6. There are seven beautiful houses. 7. The shorter man. 8. The
bad men. 9. The pig is bigger than the dog. 10. Peu’s house is
smaller than yours.
§29(b)
1. Te fare nehenehe. 2. Te mau fare nehenehe. 3. Te ’uri niaita’i.
4. ’E tau na va’a roroa. 5. Te ’uri niaita’i roa a ’e. 6. Te ’uri maita’i
roa. 7. ’E va’u mau ta’ata ’i ’ino. 8. ’Ua faito noa te rahi ’o te ’uri
’i te pua’a. 9. 'E mea hu’a a ’e te ’uri 7 te pua’a. 10. ’E mea rahi
a ’e te pua ’a 7 te ’uri.
§35(a)
1. This very good dog. 2. That short man. 3. That beautiful house.
4. Those beautiful girls. 5. This beautiful girl. 6. That bad man.
7. Those few bad men. 8. Those dogs. 9. That dog. 10. This
shorter man.
§35(b)
1. Teie fare nehenehe. 2. Teie mau ’uri nehenehe. 3. Teie na rima
haviti. 4. Tera ’uri rahi. 5. Ter a mau va’a roroa. 6. Teie tau na
ta’ata rahi. 1. Teie tamaroa iti. 8. Tena n a u ’uri maitata’i ’e maha.
9. Tera mimi iti. 10. Tera mau p o ti’i haviti.
§41(a)
I. His knife. 2. Our (dl exc.) dog. 3. Your (pi.) boat. 4. His hands.
5. Your five handsome dogs. 6. The chief’s dogs. 7. The mango
branch. 8. The carpenters’ work. 9. Terii’s leg. 10. Peu’s dogs.
II. These are their (pi.) boxes. 12. Those are your (dl) beds.
13. That is my book. 14. That is the chief’s dog. 15. That is this
woman’s letter.
§41(b)
1. Ta’u mau ’uri. 2. Töna üpo’o. 3. Tö rätou mau va’a. 4. Tä’u
mau tipi ’e öno. 5. To rätou mau ’ahu nehenehe. 6. Te üpo’o ’3
te i ’a. 1. Te ’ama’a ’o te tumu vi. 8. Te ’ohipa ’a te ta ’ata. 9. Te
üpo’o 'o Teri’i. 10. Te ’avae ’o Peu. 11. Na ’u tera rata. 12. Nana
KEY TO EXERCISES 129
tera mau afata. 13. Nä Teri’i teie puta. 14. N ä ’u teie uäti. 15. Nä
’outou teie ’amura’amä’a.
§48(a)
1. I ate. 2. He wants a box. 3. They (pi.) will cry. 4. You two
are going to town. 5. He gave the present. 6. They (pi.) were
drinking beer. 7. The man killed a pig. 8. The women were looking
at the sea. 9. The man will eat the mango. 10. The boys are
running. 11. The turtle was killed by the fishermen. 12. The man
was bitten by the shark. 13. I shall hit the dog with a stick. 14. He
was elected member of the Territorial Assembly. 15. The yams
were cooked by me. 16. The flowers were planted by the girl.
17. The wood will be cut by you (pi.). 18. A coconut tree is being
planted. 19. The rat was eaten by the dog. 20. The dog was hit
by him.
§48(b)
1. Te ’amu nei au ’i te ho’e vi. 2. Te ’aü ra ’oia ’inanahi. 3. ’Ua ’ia
hia tb’u täüpo’o ’inanahi. 4. ’Ua p a ’imi hia te poti’i ’e te tamaiti.
5. ’E täpü vau ’i te vahie ’ananahi. 6. ’E ’äu täua. 7. Te ’amu ra
rätou ’i te mau vi. 8. ’Ua hohoni te ’uri ’i tb’u ’avae. 9. ’Ua pohe
te tavana ’inanahi. 10. ’Inanahi ’ua ho’o mai vau ’i te mau puta ’e
maha. 11. ’Ua hina’aro vau ’i tana ’uri. 12. Te h i’o nei te p b ti’i ’i
te miti. 13. Te ta’oto nei te ’uri. 14. ’Ua haere ’oia ’i te ’oire.
15. ’Ua ’ia ’oe ’i tä’u puta.
§55(a)
1. He grows mangoes. 2. They (pi.) broke the glasses. 3. I shall
bring my things. 4. You spilled the milk. 5. He killed a pig.
6. They (pi.) stared at the girls. 7. They two will go to the market.
8. The men left. 9. The girls are chattering. 10. We two (exc.)
slept.
§55(b)
1. ’E ha’aputu hia te mau ha’ari marb ’ato’a. 2. ’E f a ’anehenehe
’oia ’i te piha. 3. ’E ha’apo’i hia ’oia. 4. ’E f a ’aoti vau 7 ta täua
parauparau ra. 5. ’E f a ’a ’ati hia te ’upe’a. 6. ’E fa ’a ’ite atu vau
’iana. 1. ’Ua f a ’atupu hia te hb’e tämä’ara’a. 8. ’Ua f a ’atae hia
mai te maupua’atoro 7 Tahiti. 9. ’Uahoehoe te mau ta’ata. 10. 'Ua
hi ’ohi ’o ’oia 7 te i ’a.
130 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
§62(a)
1. The girl was not sought by the boy. 2. His hat was not stolen
yesterday. 3. Moana is not sleeping. 4. The ground is not wet.
5. I am not reading. 6. I shall not cut the wood. 7. You will not
drink the wine. 8. He will not swim. 9. They (pi.) will not go to
the market. 10. Iam not eating.
§62(b)
1. ’E ’ita vau ’e haere 7 te mätete. 2. ’Aita te tao’a 7 horo’a hia 7
tetavana. 3. ’Aita te mau ta’ata 7 tae mai. 4. ’Aore au ’e tämä’a nei.
5. ’Aita ’outou 7 tama’a. 6. ’E ’ita te ’uri ’e hohoni 7 te ta’ata.
7. ’E ’ita ’o Peu ’e ’äu. 8. ’E ’ore au ’e ’amu 7 te Ufi. 9. ’Aita te
vahine 7 tanu 7 te tumu ha’ari. 10. ’E ’ere rätou 7 te tamari’i.
§71(a)
1. We two (exc.) left. 2. There are the Tuamotu Islands. 3. He will
arrive in the district of Paea. 4. He will go to Mataiea. 5. He was
received by the Queen. 6. A feast was organised. 7. I will explain
to him about the work. 8. They (pi.) let down the nets. 9. They
(pi.) go to the edge of the lagoon. 10. We two (exc.) think we will
go to the islands.
§71(b)
1. ’E tämä’a maita’i ’orua 7 teie mahäna. 2. ’E haere te mau ta’ata
’ato’a. 3. ’Ua haere rätou 7' te p o ’ipo’i. 4. ’E tämä’a rätou. 5. Te
vai ra te mau tiare 7 te mau motu ’ato’a. 6. ’E ’ita taua tiare ra ’e
tupu 7 te mau välti ’ato’a. 7. ’Ua t i ’i ’outou 7 tera tiare. 8. Te haere
nei tätou 7 roto 7 te ho’e fare toa. 9. Te hina’aro nei vau 7 te hö’e
piripou. 10. ’E rave vau.
§76(a)
1. The ground is wet. 2. This is my wife. 3. I have two pigs.
4. They (pi.) have a good dog. 5. That is his house. 6. The yams
are not hard. 7. That man is very big. 8. That girl is beautiful.
9. It is not small. 10. We two (exc.) have no money.
§76(b)
1. ’E mea roa te purumu. 2. ’E ’ere 7 te mea roa. 3. ’E ’i ’ita to
’onei. 4. ’E tämä’ara’a tö ’ananahi. 5. ’E pua’a tä te tavana.
6. Aita to’u ’e fare. 1. ’Epiti tona rima. 8. 'E meaäu roa te ’anani.
9. ’Aita tä rätou ’e moni. i0. ’E ’ere 7 te mea puai ’oia.
KEY TO EXERCISES 131
§79(a)
1. The day before yesterday I went fishing. 2. I cried this morning.
3. This afternoon we (pi. inc.) shall go and buy some bread.
4. Tomorrow morning we (dl inc.) shall work. 5. Tonight I shall
sleep at home. 6. Tomorrow I shall buy a car. 7. The girl often
cries. 8. Terii is still eating. 9. Yesterday he gave a book. 10. I saw
the girl the day before yesterday.
§79(b)
1. ’Ua ’ite vau ’ia ’oe ’inanahi ra. 2. 7 teie mahana ’ua hohoni te
’uri 7 te tamaroa. 3. ’Inanahi ’ua ’la hia to’u täüpo’o. 4. ’Ananahi’e
papa’i vau 7 te rata. 5. ’Ua fatata te taime ’e tae mai tätou 7 Tahiti.
6. ’Ananahi ’ia p o ’ipo’i ’e haere rätou ’e tai’a. 7. ’Ua hohoni te ’uri
7 to’u ’avae ’inanahi ra. 8. 7 teie ahiahi ’e haere tätou 7 te ’oire.
9. 7 teie po ’e ’amu tätou 7 tä Peu pua’a. 10. ’Inanahi 'ua ’ite au 7
te mau tiare nehenehe.
§82(a)
1. The glass is on the table. 2. The wine bottle is under the table.
3. I shall go to town. 4. They (pi.) went to Terii’s place. 5. He
came. 6. I left. 7. Today I shall go to town. 8. They (pi.) will
come at two o’clock. 9. He did that man’s work. 10. Drink this
water!
§82(b)
1. Tei roto te i ’a 7 te miti. 2. ’Aita ’e i ’a 7 roto 7 te miti. 3. Teimua
mai te ’uri 7 te fare. 4. Tei n i’a iho ’oia 7 te tumu rä’au. 5. Tei muri
mai te ta’ata 7 te fare. 6. ’E päpa’i mai ’oe ’ia’u 7 te rata. 7. 7 teie
mahäna ’e reva ätu ai vau 7 Auteraria. 8. 7 te hora pae ’e tae mai
ai rätou. 9. ’Ua haere mai te ta’ata. 10. ’Eparau mai ’oe ’ia’u.
§86(a)
1. I shall go and get some food for my dog. 2. I shall buy a chair
for my house. 3. I got a canoe for you. 4. You (pi.) will give the
present to the girl. 5. He went to town with his dog. 6. He swims
well. 7. He left quickly and went fishing. 8. He is a good swimmer.
9. That is my book. 10. I bought a pig for my parents.
§86(b)
1. ’E ho’o mai vau 7 te täüpo’o no 'oe. 2. ’Ua ho’o mai ’oia 7 te i ’a
nä täna vahine. 3. ’Ua ho’o mai vau 7 te ma’a i ’a nö te tämä’ara’a.
4. ’Ua rave rätou 7 te puta nä’u. 5. Nä Teri’i taua puta ra. 6. ’Ua
K
132 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
haere vau 7 te ’oire e ’o Peu. 7. ’Ua ’äu ’oia e tana ’uri. 8. ’Ua au
vitiviti ’oia. 9. Te au vitiviti nei ’oia. 10. ’Ua hamani vau 7 teie
va’a no ’oe.
§89(a)
1. They (pi.) went to get the bread. 2. Terii went to cut the wood.
3. I went because I want the book. 4. He stayed home because it is
raining. 5. I like it because it is a beautiful flower. 6. He went to
take a walk. 7. He was still asleep because he was tired. 8. I work
in order to live. 9. He built a boat so that he could go fishing.
10. He left at noon because he is eating at Mr Terii’s house.
§89(b)
1. ’Ua haere ’oia no te rave mai 7 te i ’a. 2. ’Ua rave ’oia 7 te hamara
no te hamani 7 te fare. 3. ’Ua ho’o mai ’oia 7 te Ufi no te horo’a atu
7 tona metua vahine. 4. ’Ua ’iria ’oia no te mea ’ua ’amu vau 7
tana i ’a. 5. ’Ua ’oa’oa vau nö töna taera’a mai. 6. ’Ua here vau
’iäna nö töna haviti. 7. ’Ua parahi noa ’oia no te mea ’ua rohirohi ’oia.
8. ’Ua marua te mau rau’ere rä’au nö te mea ’ua puai te mata’i.
9. ’Ua haere ’oia ’e hopu 7 te miti nö te ve’ave’a ’o te rnahana.
10. ’E haere ätu ’oia 7 te ’oire no te farerei 7 tana hoa.
§91(a)
1. Chop the wood. 2. Look! 3. Do not cry. 4. May they (pi.)
like the girl. 5. Do not swim here. 6. Sit down. 7. Stand up.
8. Do not take the knife. 9. Do not pick the hibiscus. 10. Come
back at five o’clock.
§91(b)
1. A ’amu 7 taua mau ufi ra. 2. ’Eiaha ’e ta’iri 7 te ’uri. 3. A horo’a
mai na 7 tera puta. 4. 7a ’oa’oa rätou. 5. ’Eiaha ’e horo vitiviti.
6. A haere a rave mai 7 te i ’a 7 te matete. 7. A ’ana mai 7 te ha’ari.
8. ’Eiaha ’ia mo’e hia ’ia ’oe 7 te rave mai 7 te titeti teata. 9. ’E haere
täua ’e t i ’i 7 te poti 7 teie ahiahi. 10. 7a ineine tätou nö te taera’a
mai te tavana rahi.
§96(a)
1. Is that bird white? 2. Will he swim tomorrow? 3. Did he hit his
dog? 4. Who is that woman? 5. Who hit my dog? 6. Who is
crying in the room? 7. Who was put in prison? 8. Who was given
the book by the chief? 9. Whom are you going to see? 10. Which
fish did you (pi.) take?
KEY TO EXERCISES 133
§96(b)
1. ’E haere rätou 7 o vai mä? 2. Tehia ’uri täna ’e hina’aro?
3. Nä vai tera uäti? 4. ’Ua rave hia ’e vai? 5. No vai tera pere’o’o?
6. 'Uahoro’a r ä u a ’ite tao’a ’iavai? 7. ’O vai tera ta’ata? 8. ’O vai
tei ta’iri 7 te ’uri? 9. ’O vai ta ’oe 7 ’ite 7 te ’oire? 10. Nä vai 7
rave 7 te faräoa?
§103(a)
1. Why are they (pi.) swimming? 2. Why did he hit the dog?
3. Why was the dog killed? 4. Where did he put the book?
5. Where is the woman going? 6. Where are you going now?
7. What are we (pi. inc.) doing tonight? 8. When did he give the
book? 9. How did they (pi.) build the canoe? 10. What are you
(pi.) eating?
§103(b)
1. Nö te aha rätou 7 rave ai? 2. No te aha ’oe 7 haere mai ai?
3. Tei hea te fare rata? 4. ’Ua haere ’oe 7 he a ’inanahi? 5. Inafea
te vahine 7 ta’oto ai? 6. Mai hea mai ’oe? 7. ’O vai to ’oe i ’oa?
8. ’E mea nafea tä rätou taparahira’a 7 te ma’o? 9. ’E aha tä ’oe
7 horo’a ätu ’ia rätou? 10. Tei hea tö ’oe täüpo’o?
§107(a)
1. It is you (pi.) who hit me yesterday. 2. I saw a man building the
house. 3. I shall buy the dog that will be given to them. 4. That is
the house that I like. 5. That is the dog that they (pi.) bought.
6. I know the carpenter who built that house. 7. I went to get the
pig which will be killed for the wedding. 8. I know the man who is
being sought by the police. 9. I have found the money that you lost.
10. I very much like the car that he bought.
§ 107(b)
1. ’O ’oe te hamani 7 te va’a. 2. ’Ua ’ite au 7 te ta’ata ’o tei ta’iri
7 tä ’oe ’uri. 3. Teie te p o ti’i ’o tei tanu 7 te tiare. 4. Tera te poti’i
tä tätou 7 ’ite. 5. Teie te rata tä te tavana 7 päpa’i. 6. ’Ua reva
ätu te ta’ata tei päpa’i 7 teie puta. 7. ’Ua farerei vau 7 te poti’i tei
fa ’aipoipo hia ’inanahi ra. 8. ’Ua ’ite au ’ia Moana 7 te tanura’a 7
te hd’e tumu ha’ari. 9. ’Ua haere vau ’e h i’o 7 tä ’u vahine 7 te aura’a.
10. ’O räua tei haere ’e rama mai 7 te ’oura-miti.
134 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
§118(a)
1. I do not know when they (pi.) came. 2. You (pi.) drank beer
as you swam. 3. They (pi.) do not know why he cried. 4. I know
why he was elected mayor. 5. That man said that you are a good
man. 6. We (pi. inc.) do not know when he will return. 7. I do not
know hew he cai ght the pig. 8. He does not know whether they are
coming. 9. 1 hepe that you understand my letter. 10. I thought
that you left.
§118(b)
1. ’Ua ’ite vau 7 te mahäna ’oia 7 reva a tu ai. 2. ’Ua dri haere ’oia
ma te ’amu 7 te ho’e ’anani. 3. ’A it a vau 7 ’ite no te aha ’oia 7
ha’aparari ai 7 te hapaina. 4. ’Ua ’ite au 7 te mahäna ’oia 7 hamani
ai 7 te fare. 5. ’Ait a mtou 7 ’ite no te aha ’oia 7 reva ätu ai. 6. 'Ua
’ite ratou ’e aha tä ’u 7 rave ’inanahi ra. 7. ’Ua ’ite au e ’ua päpa’i
mai ’oe ’ia’u. 8. ’Ua parau ’oia ’e ta ’ata ’ino ’o ’oe. 9. ’Ua mana’o
vau e ’e mea puai ’oia. 10. ’Ua ’ite au ’e mea nafea to te p o ti’i
ha ’apararira ’a 7 te hi ’o-ha ’amaramarama.
§126(a)
1. We two (inc.) are looking at each other. 2. He sees himself in the
water. 3. They (pi.) bought the bread. 4. He hit Peu’s dog.
5. Tomorrow 1 shall try to go fishing. 6. Do you know how to
prepare yams? 7. They (pi.) know how' to build a house. 8. I can
build a house. 9. Can you lift the stone? 10. I cannot lift the stone.
§126(b)
1. Te h i’ohi’o nei rctou rät cm iho. 2. Tnanahi ra ’ua horohoröi räua
räua iho. 3. Nä tera ta’ata 7 ta’iri 7 te ’uri ’a Teri’i. 4. ’E tämata
’oia 7 te hamani 7 te afata. 5. ’E nehenehe tä ’u ’e rave 7 te ’ofa’i.
6. ’E ’ita täna ’e nehenehe ’e rave 7 te ’ofa’i. 7. ’Ua ’ite anei ’oe 7 te
hamani 7 te fare? 8. ’E nehenehe anei tä ’outou ’e tanu 7 te üfi?
9. E, ’e nehenehe roa tä mätou ’e tanu 7 te üfi. 10. ’E ’ita tä mätou
’e nehenehe ’e tanu 7 te üfi.
§131(a)
1. I do not want you to break my glass. 2. The man wants you to
help him. 3. They (pi.) want to build a house. 4. We (pi. inc.) do
not want to swim. 5. I must go and get the money. 6. You must
not hit that dog. 7. You must come and eat. 8. I want a ballpoint
pen. 9. I had to go and get the money. 10. If the weather is fine
tomorrow, we (dl inc.) shall go to the beach.
KEY TO EXERCISES 135
§131(b)
1. ’E reva ihoa vau 7 teie nei. 2. ’Aita vau ’e hina’aro 7 te haere 7
te ’oire. 3. ’E hina’aro ’cia 7 te ho’e ’anani. 4. ’E haere ihoa vau 7
te fare toa. 5. ’Eiaha ’oe ’e haere ’e ’em 7 teie mahäna. 6. ’E haere
ihoa te p o ti’i ’e t i ’i 7 te faräoa. 7. ’E hina’aro rätou ’e ho’o mai 7 te
poti. 8. Te hina’aro nei räua ’ia hamani vau 7 te va’a. 9. ’Eiaha ’oe
’e ha’aparari 7 ter a hapaina. 10. Mai te peu e ’e hohoni ter a ’uri 7
ta ’u moa fa ’a ’amu, ’e taparahi pohe roa vau ’iäna.
KEY TO TRANSLATIONS
§92. Arrival in Tahiti
Now we are arriving at Faaa, the airport of Tahiti. At half past
seven the plane of the UTA French airline arrives at Tahiti airport,
Faaa. Then the passengers from the UTA plane go into the tourist
reception area. I see many tourists from far away lands, from
France, America, Europe, and also from New Zealand.
I see a man coming with his bags. He wishes to take a taxi to go
to his hotel. The tourist asks the taxi-driver to take him to town,
where his hotel is. He asks the taxi-driver:
“Tell me, can you take me and drive me to the hotel?”
“Yes, certainly. Let’s go. Where are your bags?”
“Here. You can take them.”
“I shall put them in the taxi and we will go to your hotel in
Papeete.”
§97. The Post Office
This morning a tourist goes to the post office to post his letters
and his parcel to America. Now, he goes into the post office.
He sees a beautiful post office girl. Then he asks the girl how to post
his letters and his parcel.
“Good day, lovely girl. How are things this morning?”
“Very good. What brings you here?”
“I have come to post my two letters and my parcel to America.”
“Don’t panic; first I shall weigh your letters. Give me your
letters. For these two letters it is thirty-two francs. Is your parcel
to be sent too?”
“Yes, it is to be sent to America as well.”
“Well, give it to me and I shall weigh it. Your parcel is two
kilograms. It is 140 taras (700 CFP) to send this parcel by air-mail.”
“Thank you, lovely girl. I am very pleased because in coming
here I have seen what a beautiful girl you are.”
§104. Conversation
“Where have you been today?”
KEY TO TRANSLATIONS 137
“I went to the market to buy some fish. I arrived at the market
and there were no fish. So I only got some red bananas, some sweet
potatoes, and yams. How about you? Where have you been
today?”
“1 have been swimming because I had no work today. I thought
I would go and swim a little. When are you going to Raiatea?”
“I think perhaps next week. That is when we will be going to
Raiatea. The length of the stay will be perhaps two or three months.
And you? Where are you going in the near future?”
“We think we will go to the Matuita Islands because we have
some friends there who wrote saying that perhaps we would like to
go and stay on Matuita for a few days. We can certainly go out to
Matuita.”
“Now I think the time has come for me to go swimming. So I
shall have to end our conversation. 1 think, too, that your wife is
waiting at home preparing food. May you enjoy your meal.”
§108. Visit to the Shops
Here are a few explanatory words about going to the shops.
Now we are going into a shop to purchase some items that we want.
I go into the shop and ask the shop-assistant: “I would like a good
pair of trousers for myself.”
1 ask her to give me the blue trousers. So she gives them to me.
“How much are these trousers?”
“They are two hundred taras plus five hundred (1500 CFP).
Which ones do you want?”
“1 would like those blue ones. How much are they?”
“They are two hundred taras (1000 CFP).”
“Give me the blue ones.”
She gives them to me and I take them. I pay the two hundred
taras (1000 CFP).
“There is your money. Give me also that beautiful shirt down
there that I can see. Could I have it, please?”
“Don’t panic, I’ll go and get it. Here is your shirt. Do you want
it?”
“Yes, that’s the one I want. Tell me how much it is.”
“This is the price. One hundred taras plus thirty (650 CFP).”
“It is not dear. I’ll take it. Wrap up the trousers and the shirt in
a parcel. Yes, here is the money for the shirt and trousers.
“I must go; thank you very much for giving me the details about
the prices of the shirt and the trousers in this shop.”
138 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
§119. Copra
A few words about copra making. To make copra, all the dry
coconuts are gathered together. When this has been done, the ripe
or dry coconuts are cut in two. They are cut up with an axe. After
that, the coconuts which have been cut in two are opened up and
then one digs around them so as to remove the meat. When this is
finished, the coconut meat, that is, the copra, is dried in the sun for a
period of two or three weeks, if the weather is good. When the
copra is quite dry, it is put into bags to send away, and sold.
§127. The Market
The Tahiti market is always full of produce. There is a great
variety every day. This is how it is organised: the Papeete market is
always open from Monday until Sunday, from four o’clock in the
morning until seven o’clock in the evening. On Sundays it is open
from four o’clock in the morning until ten o’clock.
There are many foodstuffs which come from the districts of
Tahiti. They come also from the islands of Moorea, Huahine,
Raiatea, Borabora. The days when there is most produce at the
market are from Thursday until Sunday. From Monday until
Wednesday there is not much produce which comes into the Papeete
market. There is a large amount of produce and other local products
on sale. There are very many kinds of fish; shell necklaces are also
sold, and carvings, hats, and baskets.
There are many tourists who come to the Papeete market to look
at the quantity of produce and the fish. Because of the great variety
of products, the Papeete market has become the delight and joy of
the tourists.
§132. Fishing
Today, the twentieth of February 1968, Terii wants me to explain
to him fishing methods in Tahiti. I shall explain to him the method
of fishing with nets at the edge of the reef. Many canoes go out to
the edge of the reef. They let down their nets at the reef’s edge so as
to chase the fish into them. Then the nets are closed. Next, they
dive into the water to collect the fish so as to put them into the
canoes.
After that, they change fishing areas. They go to the edge of the
lagoon and once more let down their nets. It is the accom; allying
canoes which go and chase the fish into the nets. After this, the
fishermen dive into the sea to spear the fish, and then put them into
the canoes.
KEY TO TRANSLATION3 139
§134. Pearl-shell Diving
The work of pearl-shell diving is done every year in the Tuamotus.
The pearl-shell diving season lasts three or four months. We know
that the Tuamotus are surrounded by reefs. In the middle of the
land is the sea. It is there that pearl-shell is dived for.
In order to dive for pearl-shell, men go out into the deep water in
outrigger canoes. When they arrive, they say a prayer before diving.
There are two men in each canoe, one who dives and one who
remains in the canoe to pull up the pearl-shell baskets which are
filled by the diver. This diver descends on a rope to which a lead
weight is attached, since it is this lead weight which brings him
quickly to the bottom of the water. When he gets to the bottom,
he takes his basket and fills it with pearl-shell. When it is full,
in order to signal the ropeman in the canoe, he pulls three times on
the rope. Then he comes up and the pearl-shell basket is pulled
up as well.
When the diving is finished, the pearl-shell is sent to the pearlshell
merchants in Papeete. Then the divers receive their pay.
§135. Tahiti
Here are a few words about the French island departments of
Polynesia, Tahiti, the main island, and the town of Papeete.
Besides Tahiti, there are the Leeward Islands, the Tuamotus,
Maareva, Matuita, the Windward Islands, Raiatea, Borabora,
Huahine, and Maupiti. First we will talk about the area of Papeete,
Tahiti.
In Papeete there are new houses being built, and roads being
repaired. For this reason it can be said that in the future Papeete
will become the delight of tourists, since there are very many
tourists who come to Tahiti from America, from France, from
Britain, and Europe, to admire the beauty of the island of Tahiti.
Here are the things that will be seen by tourists when they come
to Tahiti. Before they arrive in the district of Paea, they will see
the temple of Arahurahu. From there they go to Atimaono, the
main place where sugar-cane is planted for the manufacture of sugar.
Then they go on to Mataiea and Papeari. This is the main haunt of
the painter Paul Gaugin. From there they go to Taravao. There,
there is the biggest cattle-breeding establishment in Tahiti. Here
there are New Zealand cattle which are imported to Tahiti to
increase milk production. From there they come to Afaahiti.
There, there is the Hotel Faratea, where very many tourists come to
eat.
140 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
They return to Tahiti through the districts of Hitiaa, Faaone,
Papenoo, and Haapape.
Before arriving in Papeete, they go to the promontory of Haapape,
in other words to Point Venus. There they admire the lighthouse.
Also at Point Venus is the statue of the British man, Captain Cook,
who arrived in Tahiti in the year 1769 in Matavai Bay. He was
received by Queen Pomare IV. After that, a feast was organised in
honour of their arrival. We see then that the first people to arrive
in Tahiti were British, from the city of London. These people also
carried out missionary work in Tahiti.
§136. Things to do in Tahiti
“How are things in Tahiti these days?”
“Good. The rain has stopped a little. Things are very good these
days.”
“What can I do tomorrow?”
“If it does not rain, you can go and visit the districts. There you
will observe the beauty of the countryside. You can also go to
Moorea since there are many tourists who go there. You could also
go to the lies Sous le Vent, namely Huahine, Raiatea, Borabora,
just as you wish.”
“Excellent. Tomorrow you will pick me up and we will go and
visit the districts. I do not think it will rain tomorrow. So you can
come and pick me up tomorrow morning at half past seven.”
“Yes, I shall come and pick you up tomorrow. We shall make a
trip around the island.”
“What other things are to be done in Tahiti?”
“In the evenings you can go and visit the nightclubs, the singingspots
like the Bar Lea, the Hotel Taaone, the Puooro Plage, the
Hotel Tahiti, and still more. You can also go and watch the local
dances, Tahitian dancing, the tamure, the paoa, the hivinau, the
aparima, and more.”
“Thank you very much for the information you have given me
about this place. I think perhaps that my Tahitian holiday will be
a real delight.”
§137. Planting Sweet Potatoes
In order to plant sweet potatoes, the stalks of the sweet potatoes
which have been growing for a long time are cut off. Holes are made
in which to plant the sweet potato cuttings. These cuttings are
placed in the holes which have been dug and where the earth has
been piled up. When the sweet potato cuttings have been placed in
KEY TO TRANSLATIONS 141
the holes, they are covered up. One should then water the newly
planted sweet potato cuttings, if it does not rain or if the sun is very
strong.
The season for planting yams is during the months of May, June,
July. The time until one can eat the sweet potatoes, that is to say
the time when they are mature, is about five or seven months.
The sweet potatoes can then be eaten. When the vegetable is
mature, it can be dug up from the ground.
§138. The Eel’s Hole
Today I shall tell the story of the eel’s hole. There was in the
lies Sous le Vent, notably on Tahaa, in the district of Poutoru, a
huge eel which always ate people. All the people who paddled there
in their canoes were eaten by that eel when they came to a certain
spot. He was at a promontory which was given the name “the
Eel’s Hole”, in other words “Eel’s Hole Point”. It was past this
place that people came in from the districts by canoe. And most of
them were eaten by the eel.
At that time there were also many fishermen. The champion of
the land at that time was Taarii. His trade was spear-fishing. The
people of the island saw that the eel always ate people who travelled
by canoe. One day they thought they would go and spear the eel in
order to prevent him from ever again eating the people who paddled
their canoes to the town.
One day Taarii came armed with his spear. He saw the eel
outside his hole. He thought he would spear the eel so that the
people who travelled by canoe might live, so that they would never
more be eaten by that eel. At this time he speared the eel. From
that time on, the name given to that promontory is “Eel’s Hole
Point”.
§139. The Fourteenth of July
The description of the fourteenth of July.
The fourteenth of July has become the National Day of the
French Republic. For this reason the festival of the fourteenth of
July is always held in Tahiti also. To celebrate the fourteenth of
July in Tahiti, amusement and side-show stalls are built everywhere
in the town, festooned with all kinds of tropical flowers.
On the thirteenth of July, the day on which the festivities commence,
the stalls open from midday until two o’clock in the morning.
The next morning, in other words the fourteenth, the main day of the
festival, at eight o’clock in the morning there is a march-past by the
armed forces and many other groups. At eight o’clock in the
142 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
morning of the fourteenth of July everyone assembles in the marchpast
area, in Bruat Avenue. When the Governor of the Territory
arrives at his reviewing stand, the motor cycles of the gendarmerie
swing past. Following them are the different platoons of soldiers
from the army, navy, and air force. Next come groups of singers,
dancers, athletes, footballers, basketballers, and many others.
Groups from all religious sects also march past, Protestants, Catholics,
Mormons, the Sanito and the Bethany Churches. The pupils from
all the schools also march past.
When the procession has finished, the Governor receives the
officials of the Territory for a toast. At this time the amusement
stalls and side-shows open right through until six o’clock in the
morning. That same evening there is a grand ball presided over by
the Governor of the Territory.
The July festival lasts for two weeks. There are many things
happening during those two weeks: native dances, singing, canoe,
cycle, anJ horse races. All this takes place during these two weeks.
After that, the last day of the second week marks the closing of the
great July festival, the time of celebration for the French Republic.
§140. Orange-picking
When the time comes to harvest the oranges of the valley of
Punaaruu, in the district of Punaauia, all the men who are used to
picking oranges in that valley go in. They leave early in the morning
with their bags, their clothing, and their night apparel, because when
people go to gather oranges in the valley, they sleep at the bottom
end of the valley. It is the next morning that they pick the oranges.
The season for the orange harvest at Punaaruu is during the months
of May, June, July, August.
The pickers go into the valley on foot early in the morning. In the
afternoon they arrive at the resting place. At that time they eat a
little and sleep, and in the morning they continue to a spot still
further away. That is where the Punaaruu orange plantation is.
When the orange season arrives, there are very many oranges on
the trees. The trees are just a mass of yellow. When the people get
to the spot, they climb up to pick the oranges and to fill their bags.
There are many people who go, as it is a pleasure for them to go into
the Punaaruu valley because of its beauty and real scenic splendour.
When their orange harvest is finished, they descend, bearing the
oranges that they have gathered. It is a long way to go, and they
rest many times. Then they continue until they reach level ground,
the district of Punaauia.
KEY TO TRANSLATIONS 143
§141. The Apetahi Flower
There exist many flowers, but on the island of Raiatea there is a
flower which does not grow everywhere; this is the apetahi flower.
This flower is found only on Raiatea.
The place where the flower is found is on Temehani mountain.
There are many people who go there from time to time to pick this
flower, because its bloom is not like that of other flowers. When its
petals open in the morning it makes a noise. When it opens, it opens
like a human hand. It is a very beautiful flower, white on top and
green underneath.
In order to go and pick this flower, people leave early in the
morning so as to arrive in the evening at the place where the flowers
may be gathered. There they sleep. When it is dawn, they approach
the flowers in order to hear the noise, because when their petals
open, they make a noise. This flower is extremely rare. It is not like
the other flowers which people are accustomed to see.
§142. House-building
This is how a Tahitian house, a house made of coconut leaves,
is built. To build a Polynesian house, coconut leaves are cut off
and the trunks cut up. The trunks are taken to make the house-posts.
The coconut leaves are taken to cover the house. Bamboo is also cut
and woven to make the walls, the door, and the windows.
To make the posts, trunks of coconut trees are got. Coconut
leaves are woven to cover the house. When this is finished, the house
is covered with them. Slraight beams are also cut, from the purau
tree and others, to make the rafters of the house. When the posts
have been sunk, the rafters are attached. When this is finished, the
house is thatched. Next, the floor of the house is made. The short
posts are installed inside, and the floor is laid, lashed in place with
woven bamboo. The bamboo walls are put in, as are the windows
and doors. A Polynesian-style house is now completed.
§143. Fishing with Stones
Fishing with stones on Borabora. On Borabora this type of
fishing is done when there are a lot of tourists. At these times a
reception is organised for the tourists by the population of Borabora,
consisting of songs, dances, and Tahitian feasts. When this is
finished, the tourists go and tour the island of Borabora. Then they
go and watch the way fishing with stones is done.
This is how this type of fishing is organised: the whole population,
men and women, are adorned with crowns of flowers on their heads
144 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
and around their necks and wear many different kinds of sarongs.
They go into the water to make a stone enclosure. When this is
finished, everyone, men, women, and children go out to the deep
water throwing stones into it so as to chase the fish into the enclosure.
Then the fish all race into the enclosure, which is right at the shore.
The tourists go in to look at the fish in the enclosure, taking photos
and filming this fishing activity. All the tourists can go into the fish
enclosure and take the fish of their choice. Tourists are most
enthusiastic about this type of fishing, and it is for this reason that
many tourists come specially to Borabora to watch it.
§144. The Breadfruit Legend
Once upon a time there was a mother whose husband was dead
and who had many children. At that time, that is to say, at the time
of the death of her husband, she always remained alone with her
children. So in order to feed them she would go and tend the
gardens and plant vegetables. Previously it was her husband who
went to tend the gardens and collect the food to feed them. Then the
woman’s husband died. It was now she who collected the food.
At that time the country was in a state of famine. The woman and
her children were in great difficulties because they had no food.
One day she went down to the sea-shore and wept for her husband.
At that time a man approached. He said to her, “Why are you
weeping?”
The woman replied: “I am weeping because we no longer have
any food.”
Then the man said: “Do not cry, because you will have food.”
Then he said to her: “Weep no more, because tomorrow morning
when you wake up, you will see a breadfruit tree in front of your
house. That tree will be my body transformed into a breadfruit tree,
so that you and your children may live.”
The next morning when the woman woke up, the breadfruit tree
had grown and it was already bearing fruit. It was laden with fruit.
The woman was very happy because fortunately, because of this man,
they could eat, since he had transformed his body into a breadfruit
tree. From this comes the legend of the breadfruit tree.
§145. The Lepers’ Feast Day
A few words about the lepers of Orofara, Tahiti. Each year in
Tahiti there is a celebration for the lepers of Tahiti, of Orofara.
That day is called lepers’ day. Before this great celebration takes
place, many presents are sent to the centre of Orofara, the place
KEY TO TRANSLATIONS 145
where the lepers live. Much food and many parcels are given to
them, even toys for the children and also gifts of money.
When this feast day arrives, the Governor attends so as to pay
honour to the feast of the lepers. The celebration is opened in the
morning by a fanfare from the armed services. When this is over,
the Governor speaks, to which the Director of Orofara replies.
The Governor speaks again in reply to the Director of Orofara.
When this is finished, there are songs by the people of Orofara.
Next, all the religious groups and groups of singers come in to pay
honour to the feast of the lepers until the evening.
On this day there are many songs sung by the lepers of Orofara
themselves; there are also orchestras from the town of Papeete,
groups of singers and dancers, namely the Heiva group, the Mae\a
Tahiti, Tahiti Nui, and Paulina groups who come and pay honour to
this celebration. The different religious groups also sing. The
Director of Orofara speaks again to end the celebration, and is
thanked by the Governor. Then songs of farewell are sung by the
Orofara group itself, and the celebration is over. At this time all the
people return to the town of Papeete. This is how the lepers’ feast
day is organised in Tahiti.
THE TAHITIAN FAMILY
146. Kinship Terms
The most commonly used kinship terms are as follows:*
the family
the parents
te f e t i ’i
na metua
te metua täne
te metua vahine
te tamaiti
te tamäroa
te tamaitipa’arif
te tamäroa p a ’ari
te tamahine
te tamahine p a ’ari
te taure’are’a täne
te taure’are’a vahine
te poti ’i
te teina
te taea’e
te tua’ana
te taea’e matahiapo
te tuahine
te tuahine matahiapo
te tamaiti f a ’a ’amu
te tamähine f a ’a ’amu
te papa ru’au
te mamä ru’au
te mo’otua täne
te mo’otua vahine
te hina
te maeha’a
te metua f e t i ’i
te huno’a täne
the father
the mother
the son, boy, child
the son, boy (older than ten years)
the daughter
the daughter, girl (older than ten years)
the youth (older than twenty)
the girl (older than twenty)
the girl (about twenty)
the younger brother or sister
the elder brother, brother
the eldest brother
the elder sister, sister
the eldest sister
the adopted son
the adopted daughter
the grandfather
the grandmother
the grandson
the grand-daughter
the great-grandchild
the twins
the uncle, aunt
the son-in-law
* A more complex terminology also exists, but this is used only in land titles
or genealogies.
t Pa’ari is used only when there is reason to be very specific about age.
THE TAHITIAN FAMILY
te huno ’a vahine
te metua ho’ovai tane
te metua ho’ovai vahine
te tao’ete tane
te tao’ete vahine
the daughter-in-law
the father-in-law
the mother-in-law
the brother-in-’a v
the sister-in-law
147
L
TAHITIAN-ENGLISH
GLOSSARY
ä again, once more
a ’ahiäta dawn, early morning
’a ’ahu ’o ’omo shirt
’a ’amu legend
ä ’au reef, reef enclosure
ä ’e used to convey the comparative
ä ’e nei already
ä ’e ra then
Ufa half
'afa’i to transport
’afaro straight
afata box
afata tauiha’a parcel, baggage
afea? when?
ähiähi afternoon, evening
ahiri if, well, then
aho to breathe
’aho rafter
’ahu clothes, dress, shirt
ai particle indicating movement
’ai to eat (of animals)
’aita no, not
’aita re’a few
'aita roa ätu never
’aiteä not yet
’aito champion
’aiü baby
’ama ’a branch
’ama’a rä’au branch, stick
a maha fourth
amo to carry on the shoulder
’amu to eat
’amui bundle of goods, tied
’amura ’amä ’a table
’ana to grate
’ana’ana shining, to shine
’ana’anatae eager, enthusiastic
äna’e also, as well, only
’ananahi tomorrow
’ananahi ätu day after tomorrow
’ananahi ’ia pd tomorrow night
’ananahi ’ia po’ipo’i tomorrow
morning
’anani orange
a napo tomorrow night
anavai river
anei interrogative marker
äni to ask
äo world, day
ä ’o to warn, chastise, preach
’a ’o fat of fish
’aore no, not
’aore ra or
a pae fifth
apara apple
aparima kind of dance
apetahi kind of flower
’api page
’apt new
’api-parau writing-paper
a piti second
’apo’o hole
Apo’ora’a Rahi Territorial Assembly
ära to wake up, beware
’arapo ’a neck, throat
’ara ’uä’e soon
TAHITIAN-ENGLISH GLOSSARY 149
area period
are’a ra however
’arearea amusement
'are miti wave
ari 7 king, royal family
ari 7 vahine queen
äroä street, avenue
äroha to greet
’ata to laugh, stem
äta cloud
’ata difficult, bunch
’a tae roa ätu until, as far as
a tahi first
atari bunch of fruit
ätea distant, far away
Atete August
’ati disaster, misfortune
atira enough
äto to thatch
’ato ’a also
Atopa October
a torn third
ätu indicates movement away
from the speaker
atua God
Utura then
’atu’atu to arrange, to place,
neat
au I, me
’au to chew
’au to swim
äu nice, good, to like
ä ’u to hunt
’aua fence, enclosure
auä’e fortunately
äuahi fire
äuä’u to hunt, pursue
’aufau to pay
’auri iron, spear
’aute hibiscus
Auteraria Australia
äva passage (between reefs)
’ava’ava cigarette, sour, salty
’avae leg
’ava’e month, moon
ävatea afternoon
’e it is, demonstrative particle
e different
’e aha? what? why?
’e aha te huru? how are things?
’eahatetumu? for what reason?
’e ’ere not
’ehia? how much?
’ehia moni? how much?
’ei in, at, as
’em thief
’eiaha negative imperative
’eiaha ’e rü! there’s no hurry!
’e’ita no, not (future)
ena already
’e ’ore no, not (future)
’e paha perhaps
Eperera April
’e raverahi many, numerous
’er e ’er e black, brown
’e riro paha perhaps
’e tae atu until, as far as
’ete basket
’e te vai ätura etcetera
’e vai? by whom?
fa ’a valley
fa ’a- causative prefix
fa ’a ’afaro to straighten
fa ’a ’ahu to clothe
fa ’a ’amu to adopt a child, to feed
fa ’a ’amura’a breeding
fa ’a ’apu farmer, plantation, to
cultivate
fa ’a ’ati to surround, tour, close
(a net)
fa ’aea to stop, stay, reserve
fa ’a ’eta’eta tino athlete
fa ’afa’aea to stay, stop, remain,
cease *
150 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
f a ’afa’aeara’a holiday, stay
J'a’afaito to weigh, make equal
f a ’afarerei to introduce
fa'afariu to convert
f a ’afatata to bring near
f a ’aha’amä to shame
f a ’ahanahana to celebrate
f a ’ahapa to punish
f a ’ahoro to drive, convey
fa ’ahorora ’a race
f a ’ahou again, once more
f a ’a ’i to fill
f a ’a ’ino to do evil
f a ’aipoipo to marry
f a ’a ’ite to explain, tell
fa ’a ’itera ’a information
f a ’amahu to be patient
f a ’amata’u to terrify
f a ’anaho to organise, place
f a ’anehenehe to beautify, clean
f a ’aoti to end, conclude, finish
f a ’arapu to stir, mix
f a ’arava’i to increase
f a ’ari’i to receive, to accept,
recipient
f a ’ariro to accept, to become
f a ’aro’o to listen to, to hear, to
believe, religion
f a ’atae to import
f a ’ata’i to cause weeping
f a ’ata’ira’a pü fanfare
fa a tea! go away!
f a ’a ti’a to agree, sink a pest
f a ’atito to pollenate
f a ’atupu to organise
f a ’ehau soldier
faito to weigh
fanau to be born, give birth
fanau’a young of animals
Far air e Friday
faräne franc
Farani France, French
faräoa bread
fare house
fare ’auri prison
fare inura’a bar, bistro
fare iti toilet, W.C.
fare ha ’api ’ira ’a school
fare hau town hall
fare ma 7 hospital
fare moni bank
fare purer a ’a church
fare rata post office
färerei to meet, see, visit
fare tämä’ara’a restaurant
fare toa shop
fatata soon
fati to be broken
faufa’a gain, profit, worth
fefe twisted
f e f e a boil
f e ’i red banana
feiä group of people
feiä-porote members of a procession
feia-rave-pärau pearl-shell merchants
feiä-tai ’a fishermen
fenua ground, country, land
Fepuare February
feruri to think, reflect
f e t i ’i family
feti ’a star
fifi to be in difficulties
fiu to be weary, bored
ha’a- prefix used with causative
verb, indicating “to cause to
be done”, “to have something
done”
ha ’afaufau to debase
ha’afefe to bend
ha’afifi to entangle
ha’afirifiri to curl
ha’afiu to bore
ha’amaheu to discover
TAHITIAN-ENGLISH GLOSSARY 151
ha’amaita’i to do good
ha’amana to authorise
ha’amani’i to spill
ha’amanina to make level
ha’amaoro to delay
ha’amaramarama to enlighten,
to explain, window
ha ’amarari to disperse
ha’amata to state, commence
ha’amatara to untie
ha’amau to establish
ha’amaii’a to waste
ha’ama’ue to make fly
ha’amauiui to inflict pain
ha’amaurüru to thank, please
ha’amenemene to make round
ha’ami’cmi’o to crumple
ha’amo’e to forget, lose
ha’apa’apa’a to roast
ha’apapü to level, assure
ha’aparari to break, smash
ha’apau to consume
ha’ape’ape’a to annoy
ha ’ape ’epe ’e to hasten
ha’api’i to learn
ha’apiha’a to cause to boil
ha’apiha’e to vomit
ha’apohe to kill
ha’apo’i to cover up
ha’apoto to shorten
ha’apoupou to applaud
ha’apuai to exert strength
ha’apu’e to gather together
ha’apupu to class, classify
ha ’apurara to scatter
ha’aputa to pierce
ha’aputu to heap up, gather up
ha’ari coconut
ha’avare to tell lies
ha’avi to punish
haere to move, go
haere Zitu to go
haere mai to come
haerera ’a visit
hahaere to go (dl)
halm to shave, razor
hamani to build, make
hamara hammer
hapaina glass
hape mistake, to be wrong
hapono to send, post
hapü pregnant
haru to seize
hau government
haumi wet, damp
ha’wie to weave
ha’uti to play, toy, game
hava’i to put, deposit, send
haviti beautiful
havitiviti beautiful (pi.)
hei garland, crown
hei-püpü shell necklace
hemo to be surpassed, to pass
hepetoma week
here to love, sweetheart
Ilia passive marker
h i’a to slip, fall
himene song, to sing
hina great-grandchild
hina’aro to want, like
hio to whistle
h i’o to observe, see, look at,
glass, mirror
hi ’ohi ’o to stare at
hitimahuta to be startled, to start
hitu seven
hivinau kind of dance
hoa friend
hoe to paddle, row
hd’e one, a, an
hö ’e 'ahuru ten
hd’e ’ahuru ma hitu seventeen
ho ’e ’ahuru ma ho ’e eleven
ho’e ’ahuru ma iva nineteen
hd’e ’ahuru ma maha fourteen
hd’e ’ahuru ma duo sixteen
152
ho ’e ’ahuru ma pae fifteen
ho ’e ’ahuru ma piti twelve
ho’e ’ahuru ma toru thirteen
hö’e ’ahuru ma va’u eighteen
hö’e hanere one hundred
hö’e haneremaho’e one hundred
and one
hö’e tauatini one thousand
hoehoe to row here and there
hoera’a-va’a canoe race
hoho’a photograph, image, likeness
hohoni to bite
hohoro to run (dl)
ho’i to return, in fact
honu turtle
ho ’o to sell
ho ’o-haere to shop
ho’o mai to buy
hope’a last, last born
hopoi to send, carry
hopu to dive, bathe
hora time, hour
horo to run
horo patete passenger
horo’a to give
horöi to wash
horohoröi to wash repeatedly
hotera hotel
hotu to produce, to bear fruit
hou before
hu’a small
huero egg
hui used respectfully of a group
of esteemed people
hui mana officials
hui ra’atira people
huru subject, manner, way,
method
huru ätea ätu further away
huruhuru body hair
hururau different, diverse
huti to pull up, pull
CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
7 full, to fill
i ’a fish
’ia to steal
’ia ora na hello, greetings, goodbye
’ia vai? to whom?
ihora then
7 hea? where?
ihoa exactly, in fact
ihu nose
7 ’ita pawpaw
7 ’ita 'otane male pawpaw
7 ’ita ’ovahine female pawpaw
'imi to gather, collect, look
for
7 mua mai in front of
7 muri iho after that, next
7 muri mai behind
7 muta’a ihora at that time,
formerly
7 muta ’a iho formerly
’ina 7 meat
7nanahi yesterday
’inanahi atura the day before
yesterday
7 napö last night
ineine to prepare
7 ni ’a on
’ino bad
inu to drink
inuinura’a drink, toast
i ’oa name
’iore rat
7 ö vai? at whose place?
7 piha’i iho beside
7 raro at the bottom, down
7 rapae outside
7/7 skin
’iria to be angry, angry
’iriti to translate
7 ropu in the middle
7 roto into, in, inside
7 rotopu among
TAHITIAN-ENGLISH GLOSSARY 153
’ite to see, to know, to find, to
understand, wise
7 tai towards the sea
7 teie ähiähi this afternoon
7 teie nei now
7 teie nei mahana today
7 teie po this evening
7 teie po’ipo’i this morning
7 teie ru’i tonight
7 teie taime now
iti small, few
itoito courage
7 uta at the bottom, towards the
land
iva nine
ma family group
ma ’a food, white of the coconut,
fruit
ma’a small quantity when applied
especially to food, sling
ma’ahia to become fruitful
mä’e to lift
maeha’a twin
maere to be astonished, exceptional
maeva! welcome!
maha four
maha ’ahuru forty
mahana sun, day
mahanahana warm
mahana hope’a the last day
Mahana Mu'a Saturday
Mahana Maha Thursday
Mahana Piti Tuesday
Mahana Tom Wednesday
mahora to spread open
mahuta fly, take off
mai like, as, towards the
speaker, with, since, from
mai te mea ~e if, whether
mai te peu e if
ma’i hia to be sick
mai ’a banana
maia’a mother of an animal
maira then, there
ma’iri past (time)
maita 7 good, well
ma’iti to elect
mama light, inexpensive
mama mother
mama ru’au grandmother
mamoe sheep
mämu! be quiet!
mana authorities
mana’o to think, hope
manava! welcome!
maniania to make a noise, to
annoy
manihini guest
manu bird
manuia cheers! good luck! to
succeed
manureva aeroplane
ma ’o shark
ma ’ohi Polynesian
maoro for a long time, to be
late
maorora’a period, time, length
mara’a to be raised, to rise
marae temple, ceremonial place
maramarama intelligence
märehurehu dusk
Marite America
maro belt (royal)
maro dry
märo to be stubborn
mam calm, gentle, soft
mama to fall (leaves)
mata face, eyes
matahiapo first-born
matahiti year
mata’i wind
mäta’ita’i to look at, admire
matamua first
154
matara to become untied, open,
to start
mata’u to fear
rriatau to be accustomed, used
to, know
matau hook
mata’eina’a district
matete market
Mad March
mad match
mataro sailor
matie green, grass
mätou we (pi. exc.)
mau plural marker, true, real,
to hold
mäua we (dl exc.)
maU’a to be wasted
ma’ue to fly
mauiui pain, to ache, to be sad
maurüru to thank, thank you
Me May
mea thing
mero member
metua parents
metua täne father
metua vahine mother
mihi to weep, to lament, grief
mimi cat, to urinate
miniti minute
mid sea
mid popa ’a salt
mo ’a Saint
moa fowl
moa oni rooster
moa ufa hen
moana sea, ocean
mo’e to lose, to be forgotten, to
forget
moemoea dream
mohina bottle
momoni Mormon
monamona sweet
moni money
CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
moni-ho’o price
moni-hu’ahu’a change
Monire Monday
Mo’orea Moorea
mo ’otua grandchild
miöri light
moto motor cycle
moto to fight, brawl
motu island
motu raro mata’i lies Sous le
Vent
mou’a mountain
mori-turama-äva lighthouse
muto 7 police
mutu to be cut
na the (dl marker), near the
addressee
na benefactive (for), by
nafea? how?
namuaa’e before
nana flock, herd
nä ni ’a in, by
naonao mosquito
nä raro noa on foot
nä ropu between
nä roto by means of
nä vai serves the same purpose
as ’o vai but is used only with
transitive verbs
nava’i to be sufficient
nehenehe beautiful, to be able
nei near the speaker
ni ’au coconut tree leaves
niho tooth
ninamu blue
Niu Terani New Zealand
no for, of
noa only, always, still
noa’a to be obtained
noa ätu ä although
noa iho only
no’ano’a fragrant, perfumed
TAHITIAN-ENGLISH GLOSSARY 155
noho to live, inhabit, sit
no matou, nä matou for us (exc.)
no mäua, na mäua for us two
(exc.)
nöna, näna for him, her
no ’oe, na ’oe for you
no ’örua, na ’örua for you two
nö ’outou, nä ’outou for you
no rätou, nä rätou for them
no räua, nä räua for them two
nö tätou, nä tätou for us (ine.)
nö täua, nä täua for us two (inc.)
nö te aha? why?
nö te mea because
nö’u, nä’u for me
nö vai, nä vai whose
Novema November
nui big, immense
nu’u army
’o it is (demonstrative), to dig
’oa’oa pleasure, pleasant, to be
happy
’oe you
öe bell
’o ’e sword
o’e to be in a state of famine
’ofa’i stone, coral
’ofati to break
’ofe bamboo
’ohie easy
’ohipa work, thing
oi almost
öi to mix
’oi sharp, pointed
’o’i to sprain
’oia he, she, it, yes
’oia ho’i namely
’oi ’oi quickly
’oire town
’omaha to urinate
’ona he, she, it
one sand
’onei here
öni indicates male sex in animals
öno six
öno ’ahuru sixty
’o ’o ’a bay
’o’omo to wear, to dress, to put
into
’opa ’a ripe coconut
’opahi axe
’opani door, to close, finish
ope shovel
’opü stomach, heritage
ora to live
’ore without, not, to neglect to
öri to walk
’ori dance
’orira’a hanahana grand ball
’or o’a feast, festival
’orometua missionary
’örua you (dl)
ota raw, uncooked
’otäne indicates male sex in trees
or plants
’ote’a kind of dance
oti to finish
’otu’e promontory, point
’oura-miti crayfish
’outou you (pi.)
’ovahine indicates female sex in
trees or plants
’o vai? who? which?
’oviri wild, untamed
pa’ari to be hard, mature,
stingy
pae five
pa’e male animals mature
enough to reproduce or which
have already reproduced
pae ä ’au edge of the reef
pae ’ahuru fifty
pae miti beach
pae moana edge of the lagoon
156
pae tahatai sea-shore, beach
pafa’i to gather, pick, pluck
pafa ’ira ’a harvest
päha wild boar
paha perhaps
pähere comb
pahi steamer
pahono to answer
pa’imi to look for
painu to float in the sea
pana to dig around, scoop
pa’o’a kind of dance
papa ’a crab
papa’i to write
papa ru’au grandfather
pape water
papü flat, firmly, to be sure
papu’a to wash
para ripe
parahi to sit, goodbye
parahira ’a chair
paraparau to converse
parara’a the ripening
parari to break, smash
parataito paradise
parau to converse, to speak,
word, talk
pärau pearl-shell
parau ’api news
parau tahito legend
parauparau to chat
pareu loin-cloth
paru bait
paruru wall
pata to take a photo
patia to spear (a fish), to prick
pätia -mä’a fork
patiatia to prick several times
patiri to thunder
päto’i to refuse
pau to be consumed
pa’uma to climb up
pauroa all
CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
pe’ape’a trouble, nuisance, to be
sorry
p e ’etä a bunch still attached to
a branch
peni-päpa’i ballpoint pen, pen
p~epa pepper
pepe butterfly, baby
pepe to wound
pere’o’o taxi, car
pere’o’o uira car
peretiteni Presidency
petania Bethany Church
pe ’ue mat
pi unripe
pia beer
piha room
piha’i iho beside
piharahara to open up
p i’i to call
pi ’ifare cat
pinepine often
pinia indicates the young of
sheep (lambs)
pipi to water
piripou trousers
piti two
piti ’ahuru twenty
piti ’ahuru ma ho’e twenty-one
po evening, night
pohe to die, to be ill
po’ia to be hungry
po’ihä to be thirsty
po’ipo’i morning
po’ipo’iroa early in the morning
po’o’a to make a noise
popa’a foreigner, European
popo ball
poro to make an announcement,
corner
poro marble, ball
porote to walk in procession
porotetani Protestant
poti boat
TAHITIAN-ENGLISH GLOSSARY 157
poti 7 girl
poto short (sing.)
pou pillar, to descend
pü principal, trumpet, main,
source, centre
pu ’a coral, soap
pua’a pig
pua’afanau’a piglet
pua ’ahorofenua horse
pua’a maia’a sow (pig)
pua ’aniho goat
pua ’atoro cattle
puai strength, strong
pu’e collection of men, animals,
food
püha copra
puhi eel
puhipuhi to smoke
pu’ohu to wrap up, packet
pupa bunch, usually of smaller
fruits
pupu group
püpü sea-shell
purau kind of tree (Hibiscus
tiliaceous)
pure to pray
pur era ’a prayer
purotu handsome
purumu street
puta book
püte sack, bag, suitcase
putuputu to assemble
ra far from the speaker
ra ’atira chief
ra’au tree, medicine
rahi big, very
rahira’a majority, quantity
ra’i sky
raid rice
rama to fish at night
rari wet
rata letter
rötere tourist
rätou they
rau numerous
räua they (dl)
rava’ai fishing
rau ere leaf
rava’i to be sufficient
rave to do, make, take
raverahi many
raverau many
raverave to manipulate
re to be victorious, to win, prize
re’are’a yellow
reira that (which has been previously
mentioned)
reo language, voice
repera leper
repo earth, soil, dirty
repo puehu dust
rere to fly (of a plane)
rereva to leave (dl)
reva to leave, depart, go, the
sky, flag
ri 7 a little
rima hand, arm
riro to become, to be taken possession
of
roa long, very, never
roa’a to catch, obtain
rohirohi tired, fatigued
ro7 bed
roimata tears
Ronetona London
roto (i) in, inside
rotopu among
rouru hair of the head
rü to hurry, rush
ru’au old person
ru’i night (Biblical)
ruperupe beauty
ruru bundle or collection of
something tied with rope or
liana
158
tä- causative formative with the
meaning “to put something to
use”
ta’a to be certain, to know how
to, chin, jaw
ta ’a ’era ’a farewell
ta’aero bad, poison, drunk
ta’ahira’a-pere’o’o bicycle race
tä ’amu to tie
ta’ata man, person
ta ’ata-fa ’ahoro-pere ’o ’o taxidriver
ta’atahia to become populous
ta ’ata-päpa 'i-hoho 'a artist
tae to arrive, come
taea ’e brother (general)
taera ’a arrival
taere slow, slowly
tahatai beach, shore
tahi a, another
tahua floor
tahua taura’a manureva airport
tahuna to hide
tai towards the open sea
ta’i to cry
tai’a to fish
tai’ara’a fishing
taiete society, company
taiha’a purchase
taime time
tai ’o to read, count
ta’iri to hit, beat
tämä’a to eat at table
tämä ’ara ’a feast
tamähine daughter, girl
tamahine-ho ’oho ’o shop assistant
tamaiti child (male), son
tamari’i child (general)
tamäroa small boy, son
tämata to try, attempt
tämau to hold, learn thoroughly,
make fast, put on
tämuta fare carpenter
CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
täne indicates male sex with
persons
tanito Sanito Church
täniuniu to telephone
tano to be right
tanu to plant, bury
tao’a gift, present
ta’o’oto to sleep (dl)
taora to throw
taorapopo basketballer
taote nilio dentist
taote ra’au doctor
ta’oto to sleep
tapae to land
tapapa to pursue
taparahi to kill
täparu to beg
Tapati Sunday
tapau lead-weight
tape'a to stop, look after, hold
täpo’i to cover
tapona knot
taponi to abandon
tapu to forbid
täpü to cut
täpüpü to cut in two
tara horn
tära five francs CFP
tärahu to rent, hire, bill
tari ’a ear
taro taro
tätä’i to repair
tataio short
tatara to remove, dig up
tatarahapa to repent
tätihota to sugar
tatorita Catholic
tätou we (pi. inc.)
tau time, occasion, season, period
täua we (dl inc.)
taua . . . ra may be used with
approximately the same meaning
as tera (that)
T AH1TIAN-ENGL1SH GLOSSARY 159
taui to change, turn
tauiha’a baggage, suitcase, present
täüpo’o hat
taura race or breed of men, of
animals, rope
tau na restricted plural article
taura’i to dry in the sun
taure’are’a youth, teenager
ta’urua feast, festival
tautai fishing, to fish
tauturu to help
tavana mayor, chief
tavana rahi Governor
taviri to film, to close, key,
game
te the (definite article)
teata cinema
tehia? which one?
teiäha heavy
teie this (near the speaker)
tei hea? where?
teina younger sibling (same sex)
teitei high
tena that (near the person
addressed)
Tenuare January
tera that (not near the speakers)
tere to go past, to travel, voyage
Tetepa September
ti ’a to stand up, be able
tia ’a shoes
tiahi to chase
tia 7 to wait (for)
tiare flower
tihota sugar
ti ’i statue, image, to pick, to
gather, to get
tinito Chinese
tino body
tipi knife
tiro kilogram
tit a guitar
Titema December
titeti ticket
titiro rata postage stamp
Tiunu June
Tiurai July
to sugar-cane
toe to remain
to ’eto ’e cold
tohora whale
to ’i axe
to matou, tä mätou our (pi.
exc.)
tö mäua, tü mäua our (dl exc.)
to/no to enter, sink
töna, tana his, her
tono to send
tö 'oe, tä ’oe your
to’ohia? how many?
tö ’örua, tä ’orua your (dl)
tö ’outou, tä ’outou your (pl.)
topa to give a name to, to fall
topara’a-pape waterfall
tö rätou, tä rätou their (pl.)
tö räua, tä räua their (dl)
toro to extend
toro’a job, trade, occupation
torn three
torn ’ahuru thirty
tö tätou, tä tätou our (pl. inc.)
tö täua, tä täua our (dl inc.)
totini sock
toto blood
tö’u, tä’u my
tua’ana elder sibling (same sex)
tuahine sister (of a boy)
tu’ane sister (of a girl)
tu’epopo footballer
tuha’a point, promontory, part
tumu trunk of a tree, reason,
root
tumu ha’ari coconut tree
tumu rä’au tree
tumu ’uru breadfruit tree
160 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
tunu to prepare, cook
tupa’i to kill, hit
tupohe to kill, put out a light
tupu to be present, grow, take
place
ture law
tutau anchor
tute tax
tutu kind of tree
tutu a cook
tu’u to put in, deposit, let down,
put down
ü milk
’ua past tense marker
Ua rain, to rain
u ’a kind of crab
’u’ä to bloom
uahu wharf
uaina wine
uati watch
ueue to shake
ufa indicates female sex in
animals
üfi yam
uira electricity
’umara sweet potato
’uo’uo white, clean
’upe ’a net
Upo’o head
’ura red
’uri dog
’urifanau’a puppy
’uri oni dog
’uri ufa bitch
’uru breadfruit
Uru ’anani orange plantation
uta inland, towards the interior
’utaru to weed, clean up
’ute ’ute red
va’a outrigger canoe
vaha mouth
vähi place, area
vähif a ’ari’ira’a reception area
vähi himenera’a night-spot
vähi ’orira’a nightclub
value wood
vahine woman
vahinefa’aipoipo wife
vai to be, to exist, fresh water
vaiho to put, place, leave
vanira vanilla
vau I
va’u eight
ve’a newspaper
ve’ave’a hot
vera those people (about whom
one has spoken)
vetahi some, others
vi mango
vine grapes
vinivini to tickle
vitiviti skill, quickly
ENGLISH—TAHITIAN
GLOSSARY
A, an te hd’e
abandon (to) taponi
able (to be) nehenehe, ti ’a
accept (to) fa ’ariro, fa ’ari 7
accompany (to) f a ’a ’ati
accustomed (to be) mätau
ache mauiui
admire (to) mäta’ita’i
adopt (to) f a ’a ’amu
aeroplane manureva
after that, after, next 7 muru iho
afternoon (this) 7 teie ähiähi,
ävatea
again f a ’ahou, ä
airport tahua taura’a manureva
all pauroa, pa ’ato ’a
almost oi
alone Una’e
already en a ,ä ’enei
also, as well äna’e
also ’ato ’a
although noa ätu ä
always noa
America Marite
among 7 rotopu
amusement ’arearea
anchor tutau
angry ’iria
annoy (to) ha’ape’ape’a
another te tahi
answer (to) pahono
applaud (to) ha’apoupou
apple apara
April Eperera
arm rima
army nu’u
around ’e ’ati noa ätu
arrange, place (to) ’atu’atu
arrival taera ’a
arrive (to), come tae
artist ta’ata-päpa’i-hoho’a
ashamed (to make) fa ’aha ’amä
ask (to) Uni
assemble (to) putuputu
assistant tamähine-ho’oho’o
assure (to) ha’apapü
astonished (to be) maere
athlete f a ’a ’eta’eta tino
attach, make fast (to) tamau
at that time 7 muta’a ihora
August Atete
Australia Auteraria
authorities mana
authorise (to) ha’amana
away from the speaker ätu
axe to 7, ’opahi
baby ’aiü, pepe
bad (sing.) ’ino
(dl and pi.) Vino
bag püte
baggage, suitcase tauiha’a
bait paru
ball popo
bamboo ’ofe
banana mai ’a
bank fare moni
bar fare inura’a
162 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
basket ’ete
basketballer taorapopo
bathe (to) hopu
bay ’o ’o ’a
be (to) vai
beach pae tahatai
beautiful haviti, nehenehe,
purotu
beauty ruperupe
because no te mea
become (to), to be taken riro
bed ro 7
beer pia
before na mua ä ’e, na mua ’e,
hou ’a
begin (to) ha’amata
behind 7 muri mai
bell oe
believe f a ’aro’o
belt (royal) maro
bend (to) ha’afefe
beside 7 piha 7 iho
between na ropu
be used to (to) mätau
bicycle race ta’ahira’apere’o ’o
big (sing.) rahi, nui
bill tarahu
bird manu
bitch (a) ’uri ufa
bite (to) hohoni
black ’ere’ere
blood toto
bloom ’ua
blue ninamu
boar (wild) pua’a p a ’e
boat poti
body tino
boil (a) f e f e
boil (to) ha’apihä
book puta
bore (to) ha’afiu
bottle mohina
bottom (at the bottom) 7 raro
box afata
boy tamäroa
branch ’ama ’a
bread faräoa
breadfruit ’uru
breadfruit tree tumu ’uru
break (to) ’ofati,fati
break, smash (to) parari,
ha ’aparari
breeding f a ’a ’amura’a
bring near (to) f a ’afatata
broil (to) ha’apa’apa’a
broken (to be) fa ti
brother taea ’e
build (to) hamani
bunch of fruit atari
bunch (a) still attached to a
branch pe ’eta
bunch (a) usually of smaller
fruits pupa
bundle of goods tied but containing
only same article in the
one bundle ’amui
bundle or collection of something
tied with rope or liana
ruru
butterfly pepe
buy (to) ho’o mai
by mai, 7, ’e
call (to) p i ’i
calm mam
canoe va’a
canoe (outrigger) va’a
canoe race hoera’a-va’a
car pere’o ’o uria
carpenter tamuta fare
carry (to) ämo, hopoi
cat mi mi, pi ’ifare
catch, obtain (to) roa’a
Catholics tatorita
cattle pua ’atoro
celebrate (to) f a ’ahanahana
ENGLISH-TAHITIAN GLOSSARY 163
celebration ’oro ’a
certain (to be) ta’a
chair parahira’a
champion ’aito
change moni-hu’ahu’a
change (to) taui
chase (to) tiahi
chat (to) parauparau
cheap mama
cheers! manuia!
chew ’au
chief ra ’atira, tavana
child (general) tamari’i
child (male) tamaiti
Chinese tinito
chop (to) täpü
church fare pur er a ’a
cigarette ’ava ’ava
city ’oire
class (to) ha’apupu
clean ’uo ’uo
climb up (to) p a ’uma
close (to) (a net) f a ’a ’ati
close, finish (to) ’opani
clothes ’ahu
coconut ha’ari
coconut (ripe) ’opa’a
coconut tree leaves ni ’au
cold to ’eto ’e
collection of men, animals, foods
p u ’e
comb pahere
come (to) haere mai
comparative degree ä ’e
conclude (to), end f a ’aoti
consume (to) ha’apau
consumed (to be) pau
converse (to) parau
convert (to) f a ’afariu
convey, drive (to) f a ’ahoro
cook (to) tunu
cook (a) tutu
copra püha
coral ’ofa 7, pu ’a
country fenua
courage itoito
cover (to) tapo’i
cover up (to) ha’apo’i
crab papa’a
crayfish ’oura-miti
crumple (to) ha ’ami ’omi ’o
cry (to) ta’i
cultivate (to) f a ’a ’apu
curl (to) ha ’afirifiri
cut (to) täpü
cut in two (to) täpüpü
dance (to) ’ori
daughter tamahine
dawn a ’ahiata
day mahäna, ao
day after tomorrow ’ananahiatu
day before yesterday ’inanahi
ätu
dead (to be) pohe
debase (to) ha’afaufau
December Titema
delay (to) ha’amaoro
dentist taote niho
depart (to) reva
department a ’ihu’ara’au
deposit (to) hava’i
descend (to) pou
description parau
die (to) pohe
die (to cause to die) ha’apohe
different e
difficult ’atä
difficulties (to be in) fifi
dig (to) ’o
dig around (to) pana
dig up (to) tatara
dirty repo
disaster ’ati
discover (to) ha’amaheu
disperse (to) ha’amarari
164
distant, far away atea
district mat a ’eina ’a
dive (to) hopu
do (to) rave
doctor taote rä ’au
dog ’uri
don't rush! ’eiaha’e rü !
door ’opani
down 7 raro
dream moemoea
dress, clothes ’ahu
drink (to) inu
drink, toast inuinura’a
drive (to) f a ’ahoro
drunk ta ’aero
dry maro
dry in the sun (to) taura’i
duration maorora’a
dusk märehurehu
dust repo puehu
eager ’ana ’anatae
ear tari ’a
early morning a ’ahiäta
early in the morning 7 te
p o ’ipo’i roa
earth, soil repo
easy ’ohie
eat (to) ’amu
eat at table (to) tämä’a
edge of the lagoon pae moana
edge of the reef pae ä ’au
eel puhi
egg huero
eight va’u
eighteen hö’e ’ahuru ma va’u
elect (to) ma’iti
electricity uira
eleven ho ’e ’ahuru ma ho ’e
embellish (to) f a ’anehenehe
enclosure ’aua
enough atira
CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
ensemble, entire group of people
engaged in some activity feiä
entangle (to) ha’afifi
enter (to) tomo
establish (to) ha’amau
etcetera e te vai ätura, e raverahi
ätu ä
European popa’a
evening (this) 7 teie po
exceptional maere
exist, to be vai
explain (to) f a ’a ’ite, ha’amaramarama
extend (to) toro
eye mata
face mata
fall topa, ma ’iri
family f e t i ’i
famine (to be in a state of) o ’e
fanfare f a ’ata’ira’a pü
far ätea
far from the speaker ra
farmer fa ’a ’apu
father metua täne
fear (to) mata’u
feast tämä’ara’a
feast, festival ’or o’a, ta’urua
February Fepuare
feminine of animals ufa
feminine of trees and plants
’ovahine
fence ’aua
few ’aita re’a
fifteen hö’e ’ahuru ma pae
fifth a pae
fifty pae ’ahuru
fight (to) moto
fill (to) f a ’a ’i
film (to) taviri
find (to) ’ite
finish (to) oti,fa ’a ’oti,pau (of food)
ENGLISH-TAHITIAN GLOSSARY 165
fire äuahi
first a talii, matamua
first-born matahiapo
fish i ’a
fish (to) tai ’a
fisherman ta ’ata-tai ’a
fishing rava’äi, tal’ara’a, rama
five pae
five francs CFP tära
flag reva
flat papü
float (to) painu
flock, herd nana
floor tahua
flower tiare
fly (to) ma’ue, mahuta, rere
food mä’a
footballer ta’ata-tu’epopo
forbid (to) tapu
foreigner popa’a
forget, lose (to) ha’amo’e
forgotten (to be) mo’e
for no, ria
fork päda-mä’a
formerly 7 muta’a iho
fortunately auä’e
forty maha ’ahuru
for what reason? ’e aha te
tumu ?
four maha
fourteen ho’e ’ahuru ma maha
fourth a maha
fowl moa
fragrant no’ano’a
franc faräne
France Faräni
Friday Far air e
friend hoa
from mai
front (in) 7 mua mai
fruit mä’a
full (to be) 7
further away huru ätea atu
game ha ’uti
garland hei
gather (to) pafa’i
gather, collect (to) ’imi
gather together (to) ha’apu’e
gather up (to) ha’aputu
get (to) ti 7, rave
gift tao ’a
girl poti 7
give (to) horo’a
glass h i’o, hapaina
go (to) haere
goat pua ’aniho
God atua
good maita’i
go past (to) tere
good morning ’ia ora na
government hau
Governor tavana rahi
grandchild mo’otua
grandfather papa ru’au
grandmother mama ru’au
grape vine
grass made
grate (to) ’ana
green made
greet (to) äroha
greetings! ’ia ora na!
ground fenua
group pupu
grow (to) tupu
guest manihini
guitar tita
hair (head) rouru
hair (body) huruhuru
half Ufa
hammer hamara
hand rima
handsome purotu
happy (to be) ’oa’oa
hard, mature (to be) pa’ari
hasten (to) ha’ape’epe’e
166
hat täüpo’o
he, him ’oia, ’ona
head üpo ’o
heap up (to) ha’aputu
hear (to) f a ’aro’o
heavy teiäha
hello! ’iaorana!
help (to) tauturu
hen moa ufa
here ’onei
hibiscus ’aute
hide (to) tahuna
high teitei
hire (to) tärahu
his, her torn, tana
hit (to) ta’iri
hold (to) mau, tämau, tape’a
hole ’apo ’o
holiday fa ’afa ’aeara ’a
hook matau
hope (to) mana’o
horse pua’ahorofenua
hospital fare ma’i
hot ve’ave’a
hotel hotera
hour hora
house fare
how? nafea?
how are things? ’e aha te huru?
however are’a ra
how many? ’ehia?, to’ohia?
how much? ’ehia moni?
hungry (to be) po’ia
hunt (to) äuä’u ,ä ’u
hurry (to) ni
I au, vau
if mai te peu e, mai te mea e
ill (to be) pohe 7 te ma’i
immense nui
import (to) f a ’atae
in, inside 7 roto, nä n i’a
increase (to) f a ’arava’i
CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
information f a ’a ’itera’a
intelligence maramarama
interrogative marker anei
in the middle 7 ropu
into 7 roto
introduce (to) f a ’afarerei
it is (demonstrative article) ’o, ’e
key taviri
kill (to) ha’apohe
kill (to), extinguish tupohe
kilogram tiro
king ari’i
knife tipi
knot tap ona
know (to) ’ite, matau
lagoon pae moana
lamb pinia mamoe
land fenua
land (to) tapce
language reo
last hope’a
last day mahäna hope’a
laugh (to) ’ata
law ture
lead-weight tapau
leaf rau ’ere ra ’au
learn (to) ha’api’i
leave (to) reva
Leeward Islands motu raro
mat a 7
leg ’avae
legend 'a’amu, parau tahito
length maorora ’a
leper rep era
let down (to) (net) tu’u
letter rata
level (to make) ha’amanina
level, assure (to) ha’apapü
lie (to) ha’avare
lie down (to) ta’oto
lift (to) mä’e
ENGLISH-TAHITIAN GLOSSARY 167
light mori
lighthouse mori-turama-ava
like (to) hina’aro
like, as mai
listen to (to) f a ’aro’o
little iti
little (a) r i’i
live (to) ora, noho
loin-cloth pareu
London Ronetona
long roa
long time maoro
look after (to) tape’a
look at (to) mcita’ita’i, h i’o
look for (to) pa ’imi, ’imi
lose (to) ha ’ amo ’e, mo ’e
love (to) here
main pü
majority rahira’a
make (to) rave
make a noise (to) p o ’o ’a
man ta ’ata
mango vi
manipulate (to) raverave
manner huru
many ’e raverahi, ’e raverau
marble poro
March Matt
market mätete
mat pe ’ue
match mati
May Me
mayor tavana
me ’ia ’u
meat ’ina 7
medicine rä’au
meet (to) farerei
member mero
middle (in the) 7 ropu
milk U
minute miniti
mirror hi ’o
missionary ’orometua
mistake hape
mix (to) oi
Monday Monire
money moni
month ’ava ’e
moon ’ava’e
Moorea Mo’orea
Mormon momoni
morning po ’ipo 7
morning (this) 7 teiepo’ipo’i
mosquito naonao
mother metua vahine
mountain mou’a
mouth vaha
my iö’u, tä ’u
name i ’oa
name (to) topa
namely ’oia ho’i
near the addressee na
near the speaker nei
neck ’arapo ’a
negative imperative ’eiaha
net ’upe ’a
never ’aita roa ätu
new ’ap'i
news parau ‘api
newspaper ve’a
New Zealand Niu Terani
nice äu
night ru’i, po
night (last) 7 napo
nightclub vahi ’orira’a
nine iva
nineteen ho’e ’ahuru ma iva
no ’aita
noise (to make a) maniania
no more fa ’ahou
November Novema
now 7 teie taime, 7 teie nei
number numera
numerous rau
168
observe, see (to) hi ’o
obtain (to) roa’a, noa’a
obtained (to be) roa’a, noa’a
occupation toro ’a
October Atopa
officials hui mana
often pinepine
old person ru’au
on 7 ni ’a
once more fa ’ahou
one hd’e, tahi
one hundred hd’e hanere
one hundred and one ho’e
hanere ma hd’e
one thousand hd’e tauatini
on foot na raro noa
only ana ’e, noa
open (to) matara, ’iriti
open up (to) piharahara
or ’aore ra
orchestra pupu-fa ’a ’arearea
organise (to) fa ’atupu
orange ’anani
orange plantation Uru ’anani
other te tahi
our (dl exc.) tö mäua, tä mäua
our (dl inc.) to täua, tä täua
our (pi. exc.) td mätou, tä mätou
our (pi. inc.) td tätou, tä tätou
outrigger canoe va’a
outside 7 rapae
packet pu ’ohu
paddle (to) hoe
page ’api
pain (to inflict) ha’amauiui,
mauiui
panic (don’t) ’eiaha ’e nt
paper ’api-parau
paper bag f a ’ari’i
paradise parataito
parcel afata tauiha ’a
parent metua
CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
pass (to) hemo
passenger horo-patete
passage (reef) äva
patient (to be) fa ’amahu
pawpaw 7 ’ita
pay (to) ’aufau
pearl-shell pärau
pearl-shell merchants feia-ravepärau
pen peni-päpa 7
people hui ra’atira
pepper pepa
perhaps ’e riro paha
period ärea
period, time maorora’a
person ta ’ata
pursue (to) tapapa
photo hoho’a
pick (to) t i ’i
pick, pluck (to) pafa’i
pierce (to) ha’aputa
pig pua ’a
piglet pua’a fanau’a
place vähi
place (to take) tupu
plane manureva
plant (to) tanu
plantation f a ’a ’apu
play (to) ha’uti
pleased (to be) ’oa’oa
pleasure, delight ’oa ’oa, ’arearea
point, promontory (the) ’otu’e
pointed ’oi
poison ta’aero
police muto’i
pollenate (to) f a ’atito
Polynesian ma’ohi
population hui ra’atira
post pou
post (to) hapono
postage stamp titiro rata
post office fare rata
pray (to) pure
ENGLISH-TAHITIAN GLOSSARY 169
prayer pur era ’a
pregnant hapü
prepare (to) tunu, ineine
present tao ’a
presidency peretiteni
price moni-ho ’o
prick (to) patia, ti 7
prick several times (to) patiatia
principal pü
prison fare ’auri
prize re
produce, bear fruit (to) hotu
promontory, point ’otu’e
Protestant porotetani
pull, pull up (to) huti
punish (to) ha ’avi, fa ’ahapa
puppy ’uri fanau’a
purchase tauiha ’a
put (to) vaiho
put down (to) tu’u
put, deposit (to) hava 7
put in a bag (to) ’o ’omo
quantity rahira ’a
queen ari 7 vahine
quickly ’oi’oi, vitiviti
race fa ’ahorora ’a
race, breed taura
rafter ’aho
rain (to) Ua
raised (to be) mara’a
rat ’iore
raw ota
razor hahu
read (to) tai’o
reason tuinu
receive (to) fa ’ari 7
reception area vähif a ’ari’ira’a
red ’ura
reef ä ’au
refuse (to) päto’i
religion f a ’aro’o
remain (to) f a ’aea, toe
remove (to) tatara
rent (to) tärahu
repair (to) tätä’i
repent (to) tatarahapa
reserve, remain (to) f a ’aea
restaurant fare tämä ’ara ’a
return (to) ho’i
rice raiti
right (to be) tano
ripe para
rise (to) mara’a
river anavai
roast (to) ha’apa’apa’a
room piha
rooster moa oni
rope taura
round (to make) ha’amenemene
row (to) hoe
royal family ari 7
run (to) horo, hohoro (dl)
sack, bag pute
sad (to be) mauiui
sailor mataro
salt mitipopa’a
sand one
Sanito Church tanito
Saturday Mahäna M ä ’a
scatter (to) ha ’apurara
school fare ha ’api ’ira ’a
scoop (to) pana
sea miti, moana
sea-shell püpü
sea-shore pae tahatai
season tau
second a piti
see (to) ’ite
seize (to) haru
sell (to) ho’oätu
send (to) hapono, hopoi, tono
September Tetepa
seven hitu
170 CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
seventeen hd’e ’ahuru ma hitu
shake (to) ueue
shark ma ’o
sharp ’oi
shave (to) hahu
sheep mamoe
shell necklace hei-püpü
shine (to) ’ana’ana
shirt ’ahu, ’a ’ahu ’o ’omo
shoe tia ’a
shop fare toa
shop (to) ho’o-haere
shop assistant tamähine-ho’oho’o
short poto
shorten (to) ha’apoto
shovel öpe
sick (to be) ma’i hia
signal, tell (to) f a ’a ’ite
since mai te mahäna
sing (to) himene
sink a post (to) f a ’a ti’a
sister (of a boy) tuahine
sit (to) noho 7 raro, parahi
six ono
sixteen hd’e ’ahuru ma ono
sixty ono ’ahuru
skill vitiviti
sky ra 7, reva
sleep (to) ta’oto
sling ma’a
slowly, slow taere
small iti, hu’a
smoke (to) puhipuhi
society, company taiete
sock totini
soft mam
soldier fa ’ehau
son tamaiti, tamäroa
song himene
soon fatata
sorry (to be) p e ’ape’a
sow (female pig) pua’a maia’a
sour 'ava’ava
speak (to) parau
spear (to) patia
spear ’auri
spill (to) ha ’amani 7
sprain ’o 7
spread open (to) mahora
stalk, liana ’ata
stand up (to) ti ’a
star feti ’a
stare (to) hi ’ohi ’o
start (to) matara
start, commence (to) ha’amata
start, startle (to) hitimahuta
statue ti 7
stay (to) f a ’aea
stay, holiday fa ’afa ’aeara ’a
steal (to) ’ia, ’eia
steamer pain
stick ’ama ’a rä ’au
still noa
stir (to) f a ’arapu
stomach ’opü
stone ’ofa’i
stop (to) tape ’a, fa ’afa ’aea
straight ’afaro
straighten (to) fa ’a ’afaro
street purumu
street, avenue äroä
strength puai
strength (to exert) ha’apuai
strong puai
stubborn rnäro
subject huru
succeed (to) manuia
sufficient (to be) rava’i, nava’i
sugar tihota
sugar-cane to
suitcase tauiha ’a, püte
sun mahäna
Sunday Tapati
sure (to be) papü
surpassed (to be) hemo
surround (to) f a ’a ’ati
ENGLISH-TAHITIAN GLOSSARY 171
sweet monamona
sweetheart here
sweet potato ’umara
swim (to) au
sword ’o ’e
table ’amura ’amä ’a
take (to) rave mai
take off (to) (plane) mahuta
talk, converse (to) parauparau
taro taro
taxi, car pere’o ’o
taxi-driver ta’ata-fa’ahoropere’o’o
tears roimata
telephone (to) täniuniu
tell, explain (to) f a ’a ’ite
temple marae
ten ho ’e ’ahuru
terrify (to) f a ’amata’u
Territorial Assembly Apo’ora’a
Rahi
thank (to) maurüru
thank you! maurüru!
that (not near the speakers) tera
that (near the person addressed)
tena
thatch (to) äto
the te
their (dl) to räua, tä räua
their (pi.) to rätou, ta rätou
then ihora, citura, 7 muri iho
they (pi.) (dl) rätou, räua
thief ’eiä
thing mea
think (to) mana’o, feruri
third a torn
thirsty (to be) p o ’iha
thirteen ho’e ’ahuru ma torn
thirty toru ’ahuru
this teie
these teie mau
three toru
throw (to) taora
thunder (to) patiri
Thursday Mahäna Maha
ticket titeti
tie (to) tä’amu
time, hour hora, taime, tau
tired rohirohi
today 7 teie nei mahäna
toilet fare iti
tomorrow ’ananahi
tomorrow evening ’ananahi ia’
po
tomorrow morning ’ananahi ’ia
po ’ipo 7
tonight 7 teie ru’i, 7 teie po
tooth niho
tour (to) fa ’a ’ati
tourist rät ere
town ’oire
town hall fare hau
toy ha ’uti
translate (to) ’iriti
transport (to) ’afa’i
travel (to) tere
tree tumu rä ’au
trip tere
trouble p e ’ape’a
trousers piripou
true, real mau
trumpet pü
trunk of a tree tumu
try (to) tämata
Tuesday Mahäna Piti
turtle honu
twelve ho’e ’ahuru ma piti
twenty piti ’ahuru
twenty-one piti ’ahuru ma hö ’e
twin maeha’a
twisted fefe
two piti
under 7 raro ä ’e
understand (to) ’ite
172
unless maori ra
unripe pi
untie (to) ha’amatara
until ’e tae atu, ’a tae roa citu
U.S.A. Marite
valley fa ’a
vanilla vanira
very rahi, roa
victorious (to be) r~e
visit, admire (to) mäta’ita’i
visit, tour (to) f a ’a ’ati
voice reo
vomit (to) ha ’apiha ’e
voyage tere
wait for (to) tia’i
wake up (to) ära
walk (to) ori haere
walk in procession (to) porote
wall paruru
want (to) hina’aro
warm mahanahana
warn (to) ä ’o
wash (to) horoi
wash repeatedly (to) horohoroi
waste (to) ha ’amaü ’a
wasted (to be) maü’a
watch uäti
watch (to) hi ’o
water pape, vai
water (to) p'ip'i
waterfall topara ’a-pape
way, method huru
wave ’are miti
we (dl exc.) mäua
we (dl inc.) täua
we (pi. exc.) matou
we (pi. inc.) tatou
wear (to) ’o ’omo
weary fiu
weave (to) ha’une
CONVERSATIONAL TAHITIAN
Wednesday Mahäna Torn
weed (to) ’utaru
week hepetoma
weep, lament (to) mihi
weigh (to) faito, f a ’afaito
weight tapau
welcome! manava!, haere mail
well mail a ’i
wet haumi, rari
whale tohora
wharf uähu
what? ’e aha?
when? afea?, ahea?, anafea?,
inafea?, 7 anafea?
where? tei hea? 7 hea?
whereto? 7 hea?
where from? mai hea mai?
which? ’o vai?, tehia?
whistle (to) hio
white 7/o ’uo
who? ’o vai?
whose? nö vai?, nä vai?
whose place (at)? 7 o vai?
whom? (to) 7a vai?
why? ’e aha? no te aha?
wife vahinefa’aipoipo
win (to) re
wind mata 7
window ha ’amaramarama
wine uaina
wise ’ite
with mai, e, nä muri iho
without ’ore
woman vahine
wood vahie
word parau
work ’ohipa
world äo
wound (to) pepe
wrap up (to) p u ’ohu
write (to) papa’i
writing-paper ’api-parau
wrong (to be) hape
ENGLISH-TAHITI AN GLOSSARY 173
yam Ufi
year matahiti
yellow re’are’a
yes e, ’oia
yesterday ’inanahi
you ’oe
you (dl) ’orua
you (pi.) ’outou
young (the offspring of animals)
fanau’a
your tö ’oe, tä ’oe
your (dl) tö ’orua, tä ’orua
your (pi.) to ’outou, tä ’outou
youth tamari’i, taure’are’a
a, 11
’ä, 36
ability, 123
accompaniment, 84
active verbs, 46
adjectives, 23-8
d'e, 25
afea, 100
after, 77
again, 78
agent, 47
ahiri, 130
ai, 46 (a, ix), 81, 98
’aita, 56
’aited, 60
all, 27
already, 78
’amui, 13
dna’e, 28
anafea, 100
anei, 93, 114
’aore, 56
’aore d, 60
’aore ra, 133
’aore re’a, 72
Apetahi Flower, 141
Arrival in Tahiti, 92
articles, 11-13
at, 80
’atd, 13
atari, 13
’ato’a, 27
attempted action, 125
attributive, 66
dtu, 81
dtura, 11
base, 49
be, 70
because, 88
before, 77
INDEX
(references are to sections)
benefactive, 83
Breadfruit Legend, 144
by whom?, 95
can, 123
cardinal numbers, 15, 16
causative verbs, 49-51
cause, 88
changing modifiers, 24
common nouns, 44
common noun possessors, 38
comparative, 25, 26
competence, 124
completed action, 46(a, viii)
conditional, 130
conjunctions, 133
consonants, 1
conversation, 104
Copra, 119
days of the week, 18
demonstratives, 30-4
dependent clauses, 105-17
desiderative, 128
diphthongs, 4
direction, 81
distant past, 46(a, vi)
dual, 12
dual form of verb, 53
e (with), 84
e, 115
'e (article), 11
’e (by), 47, 95
'e (future), 46(a, ix)
V aha, 94, 98, 100, 102, 110, 113
Eel’s Hole, 138
’e 'ere, 58
’ehia?, 16
’ei, 66, 80
INDEX 175
'ei hea, 99
’e'ita, 57
elision, 9
emphatic pronoun, 122
'e nehenehe, 123
enumerations, 16
’e'ore, 57
equality, 26
equational sentence, 74
'e ti'a, 123
V ua/7, 95
every, 27
fa'a-, 49
fanau'a, 13
fatata, 77
feiä, 13
Fishing, 132
Fishing with Stones, 143
Fourteenth of July, The, 139
frequency, 78
from, 80
frustrative, 46(a, x)
future tense, 46(a, ix)
gender, 13
general articles, 11
glottal stop, 1, 5
ha'a-, 49
habitual action, 46(a, viii)
have, 75
hia, 47, 51, 52, 85
hina'aro, 128
ho'i, 129
House-building, 142
how, 112
how?, 101
how many?, 16
hui, 13
7, 44, 46(a, iv), 47
ia, 54
’ia, 43, 90, 110
7 anafea, 100
if, 130
7 hea, 99, 117
iho, 46(a, v), 122
ihoa, 129
imperatives, 90
imperfect tense, 46(a, ii)
impersonal verbs, 69
in, 80
inability, 123
inafea, 100
indirect object, 65
7 ni’a, 80
initial vowels, 6
in order to, 87
intensified verbs, 54
interrogative, 93-102
interrogative non-subject, 95
interrogative subject, 94
intransitive, 63
7 o vai?, 95
7 raro, 80
irregular verbs, 47(iii)
kinship terms, 146
know how to, 124
Lepers’ Feast Day, 145
like, 26
location, 80
mä, 13
ma’a, 13
mai, 81-116
maia'a, 13
mai hea mai, 99
maira, 46(a, i)
mai te, 111
mai te mea e, 130
mai te peu e, 130
manner, 85
many, 72
Market, 127
ma te, 111
mea, 73
months of the year, 19
must, 129
na, 12, 46(a, iv), 81
nä, 37, 47, 75
nafea, 101, 112
nä muri iho, 84
nana, 13
nä roto, 80
nau, 12
nä vai, 94
necessitate, 129
need to, 129
negative, 56-61, 72, 73, 74
negative interrogative, 93
CONVERSATIONAL 176 TAHITIAN
nei, 46, 81
never, 59
no, 36, 75, 83, 95
no hea, 99
nominalisation, 46(c)
non-verbal sentences, 72-5
normal modifiers, 23
no te aha, 98, 109
no te mea, 88
not yet, 60
noun agents, 47
noun + hia, 52
numerals, 15-17
'o, 11
’5, 36
object, 44
object markers, 44
often, 78
oni, 13
only, 28
Orange-picking, 140
ordinal numbers, 17
'ore, 61, 98
'otäne, 13
oti, 46(a, vii)
ought, 129
'ovahine, 13
'o vai, 94-5
pa'ato'a, 27
pa'e, 13
participial forms, 46(c)
passive verbs, 47
past tense, 46(a, iii-vii)
pauroa, 27
Pearl-shell Diving, 134
pe'etä, 13
pharyngealisation, 6
pinia, 13
placing of time phrases, 77
possession, 36^10
possessive pronoun, 75
possessive statements, 40
Post Office, 97
present tense, 46(a, i)
pronouns, 42-3
pronoun agents, 47
pronoun objects, 43
pronoun possessors, 37
pronoun subject, 42
pronunciation, 1-9
proper nouns, 11, 44
proper noun possessors, 39
pu'e, 13
pupa, 13
purpose, 87
quantity, 13
ra, 46, 81
rahi, 25
raverahi, 12
raverau, 72
recent past tense, 46(a, v)
reciprocal, 121
reflexive, 120
roa, 25, 59
ruru, 13
sex, 13
Shops, 108
since, 77, 116
so that, 87
special articles, 13
special verb fillers, 46(b)
stress, 8
superlative, 25
Sweet Potatoes, 137
syllable, 7
tä-, 50
tä, 36
ta'ato’a, 27
table of articles, 11
Tahiti, 92
töne, 13
taua . . . ra, 33
tau na, 12
taura, 13
te, 11, 46, 94, 105-6
tehia, 95
te ho’e, 11
tei, 80, 94, 105-6
teie, 30
tei hea, 99
tei reira, 117
telling the time, 20
te mau, 11
temporal expression, 21
tena, 31
tenses, 46
ter a, 32
tera ra, 133
INDEX 177
te reira, 34
te tahi, 11
te tahi mau, 11
that, 31-4, 115
the, 11
Things to do in Tahiti, 136
this, 30
time, 20, 77
time phrases, 77
to, 36
to’ohia?, 16
to whom?, 95
transitive, 64
try, 125
’ua, 46, 73
ufa, 13
unreal condition, 130
useful phrases, 10
vahine, 13
vera, 42
vai, 70
variants, 1
verb, 45-7
verbal sentences, 63-8
vetahi mau, 11
vowels, 2
vowel length, 3
vowel sequences, 4
vowel word initial, 6
want, 128
what, 113
what?, 102
when, 110
when?, 100
where, 117
where?, 99
where from?, 99
where to?, 99
whether, 114
which?, 94
while, 111
who, 105
who?, 94
whom, 106
whom?, 95
whose?, 95
why, 109
why?, 98
with, 84
without, 61
young of animals, 13
Text set in 10 on llpt Monotype Times Roman
by The Universities Press Pty Ltd Melbourne
and printed on 89 gsm Pacote paper
by Halstead Press Pty Ltd Sydney